Moderator: (00:18)
Good evening, everyone. Good evening. Thank you so much for being here. It is such an honor for me to moderate this debate tonight, the final debate. I want to welcome the first family and the first lady. We’re so glad and thankful that you are feeling better. I want to welcome the Biden family, Dr. Jill Biden. Thank you all for being here tonight. We are so excited. We’re looking forward to a really robust discussion. And the only thing I would reiterate are the CPD guidelines that when the candidates are talking, please hold any applause or any other reactions. Except of course, when they walk out, make sure you cheer and loud and applause so that everyone can hear you. Thank you for having me. This is really the honor of a lifetime. I am going to sit down and just get organized and get settled and the show will start very soon. Thank you for being here. (silence). Good evening from Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee. I’m Moderator of NBC News. And I welcome you to the final 2020 presidential debate between Donald Trump and former Joe Biden. Tonight’s debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates. It is conducted under health and safety protocols designed by the Commission’s health security advisor. The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, boos, or other interruptions, except right now, as we welcome to the stage, former Joe Biden and Donald Trump.

Donald Trump: (07:37)
How are you doing? How are you?

Moderator: (07:58)
And I do want to say a very good evening to both of you. This debate will cover six major topics. At the beginning of each section, each candidate will have two minutes, uninterrupted, to answer my first question. The Debate Commission will then turn on their microphone only when it is their turn to answer. And the Commission will turn it off exactly when the two minutes have expired. After that, both microphones will remain on. But on behalf of the voters, I’m going to ask you to please speak one at a time.

Moderator: (08:27)
The goal is for you to hear each other and for the American people to hear every word of what you both have to say. And so with that, if you’re ready, let’s start. And we will begin with the fight against the coronavirus. President Trump, the first question is for you. The country is heading into a dangerous new phase. More than 40,000 Americans are in the hospital tonight with COVID, including record numbers here in Tennessee. And since the two of you last shared a stage, 16,000 Americans have died from COVID. So please be specific. How would you lead the country during this next stage of the coronavirus crisis? Two minutes, uninterrupted.

Moderator: (09:03)
… during this next stage of the coronavirus crisis. Two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (09:04)
So as you know, 2.2 million people modeled out, were expected to die. We closed up the greatest economy in the world in order to fight this horrible disease that came from China. It’s a worldwide pandemic. It’s all over the world. You see the spikes in Europe and many other places right now. If you notice, the mortality rate is down 85%. The excess mortality rate is way down and much lower than almost any other country. And we’re fighting it and we’re fighting it hard. There is a spike. There was a spike in Florida and it’s now gone.

Donald Trump: (09:41)
There was a very big spike in Texas. It’s now gone. There was a very big spike in Arizona. It’s now gone. And there was some spikes and surges and other places, they will soon be gone. We have a vaccine that’s coming. It’s ready. It’s going to be announced within weeks. And it’s going to be delivered. We have Operation Warp Speed, which is the military is going to distribute the vaccine.

Donald Trump: (10:04)
I can tell you from personal experience, I was in the hospital. I had it and I got better. And I will tell you that I had something that they gave me, a therapeutic, I guess they would call it. Some people could say it was a cure, but I was in for a short period of time. And I got better very fast or I wouldn’t be here tonight. And now they say I’m immune. Whether it’s four months or a lifetime, nobody’s been able to say that, but I’m immune. More and more people are getting better. We have a problem that’s a worldwide problem. This is a worldwide problem, but I’ve been congratulated by the heads of many countries on what we’ve been able to do. If you take a look at what we’ve done in terms of goggles and masks and gowns and everything else, and in particular ventilators we’re now making ventilators all over the world, thousands and thousands a month distributing them all over the world. It will go away. And as I say, we’re rounding the turn. We’re rounding the corner. It’s going away.

Moderator: (11:06)
Okay. Former Vice President Biden to you. How would you lead the country out of this crisis? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (11:13)
220,000 Americans dead. You hear nothing else I say tonight, hear this. Anyone who is responsible for not taking control. In fact, not saying I take no responsibility initially. Anyone is responsible for that many deaths should not remain as president of the United States of America. We’re in a situation where there are a thousand deaths a day now. A thousand deaths a day. And there are over 70,000 new cases per day. Compared to what’s going on in Europe as the New England Medical Journal said, they’re starting from a very low rate. We’re starting from a very high rate.

Joe Biden: (11:56)
The expectation is we’ll have another 200,000 Americans dead between now and the end of the year. If we just wore these masks, the president’s own advisors have told him, we can save a 100,000 lives. And we’re in a circumstance where the president thus far and still has no plan, no comprehensive plan.

Joe Biden: (12:19)
What I would do is make sure we have everyone encouraged to wear a mask all the time. I would make sure we move into the direction of rapid testing, investing in rapid testing. I would make sure that we set up national standards as to how to open up schools and open up businesses so they can be safe and give them the wherewithal, the financial resources to be able to do that.

Joe Biden: (12:41)
We’re in a situation now where the New England Medical Journal, one of the serious, most serious journals in the whole world said for the first time ever that the way this president has responded to this crisis has been absolutely tragic. And so folks, I will take care of this. I will end this. I will make sure we have a plan.

Moderator: (13:01)
President Trump, I’d like to follow up with you and your comments. You talked about taking a therapeutic, I assume you’re referencing Regeneron. You also said a vaccine will be coming within weeks. Is that a guarantee?

Donald Trump: (13:13)
No, it’s not a guarantee, but it will be by the end of the year. But I think it has a good chance. There are two companies, I think within a matter of weeks and it will be distributed very quickly.

Moderator: (13:22)
Can you tell us which companies?

Donald Trump: (13:23)
Johnson & Johnson is doing very well. Moderna is doing very well. Pfizer is doing very well and we have numerous others. Then we also have others that we’re working on very closely with other countries, in particular Europe.

Moderator: (13:35)
Let me follow up with you and because this is new information. You have set a vaccine is coming soon within weeks now. Your own officials say, “It could take well into 2021 at the earliest for enough Americans to get vaccinated.” And even then they say, “The country will be wearing masks and distancing into 2022.” Is your timeline realistic?

Donald Trump: (13:53)
No, I think my timeline is going to be more accurate. I don’t know that they’re counting on the military the way I do, but we have our generals lined up, one in particular that’s the head of logistics and this is a very easy distribution for him. He’s ready to go. As soon as we have the vaccine and we expect to have a 100 million vials. As soon as we have the vaccine, he’s ready to go.

Moderator: (14:13)
Vice President Biden, your reaction. And just 40% of Americans say they would definitely agree to take a coronavirus vaccine if it was approved by the government. What steps would you take to give Americans confidence in a vaccine if it were approved?

Joe Biden: (14:26)
Make sure it’s totally transparent. Have the scientists of the world see it, know it, look at it, go through all the processes. And by the way, this is the same fellow who told you, “This is going to end by Easter” last time. This is the same fellow who told you that, “Don’t worry, we’re going to end this by the summer.” We’re about to go into a dark winter, a dark winter and he has no clear plan. And there’s no prospect that there’s going to be a vaccine available for the majority of the American people before the middle of next year.

Moderator: (14:54)
President Trump, your reaction. He says, you have no plan.

Donald Trump: (14:56)
I don’t think we’re going to have a dark winter at all. We’re opening up our country. We’ve learned and studied and understand the disease, which we didn’t at the beginning. When I closed and banned China from coming in heavily infected and then ultimately Europe, but China was in January. Months later, he was saying I was xenophobic. I did it too soon. Now he’s saying, “Oh, I should have moved quicker,” but he didn’t move quicker. He was months behind me, many months behind me.

Donald Trump: (15:24)
And frankly, he ran the H1N1 swine flu and it was a total disaster. Far less lethal, but it was a total disaster. Had that had this kind of numbers, 700,000 people would be dead right now, but it was a far less lethal disease. Look, his own person who ran that for him, who, as you know, was his chief of staff said, “It was catastrophic. It was horrible. We didn’t know what we were doing.” Now he comes up and he tells us how to do this.

Donald Trump: (16:01)
Also, everything that he said about the way every single move that he said we should make, that’s what we’ve done. We’ve done all of it. But he was way behind us.

Moderator: (16:10)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (16:12)
My response is he is xenophobic, but not because he shutdown access from China. And he did it late after 40 countries had already done that. In addition to that, what he did, he made sure that we had 44 people that were in there in China trying to get the Wuhan to determine what exactly the source was. What did the president say in January? He said, ” No.” He said, “He’s being transparent. The president of China is being transparent. We owe him a debt of gratitude. We have to thank him.”

Joe Biden: (16:38)
And then what happened was we started talking about using the Defense Act to make sure we go out and get whatever is needed out there to protect people. And again, I go back to this. He had nothing, he did virtually nothing. And then he gets out of the hospital and he talks about, “Oh, don’t worry. It’s all going to be over soon.” Come on. There’s not another serious scientist in the world who thinks it’s going to be over soon.

Moderator: (17:03)
President Trump, your reaction?

Donald Trump: (17:04)
I didn’t say over soon. I say we’re learning to live with it. We have no choice. We can’t lock ourselves up in a basement like Joe does. He has the ability to lock himself up. I don’t know. He’s obviously made a lot of money someplace, but he has this thing about living in a basement. People can’t do that. By the way I as the president couldn’t do that. I’d love to put myself in the basement or in a beautiful room in the White House and go away for a year and a half until it disappears. I can’t do that.

Donald Trump: (17:31)
And Kirsten, every meeting I had, every meeting I had and I’d meet a lot of families, including gold star families and military families. Every meeting I had and I had to meet them, I had to. It would be horrible to have canceled everything. I said, “This is dangerous and you catch it.” And I caught it. I learned a lot. I learned a lot. Great doctors, great hospitals. And now I recovered. 99.9 of young people recover. 99% of people recover. We have to recover-

Donald Trump: (18:03)
99% of people recover. We have to recover. We can’t close up our nation. We have to open our school and we can’t close up our nation, or you’re not going to have a nation.

Moderator: (18:11)
And, of course, the CDC has said young people can get sick with COVID-19 and can pass it. Vice President Biden, I want to talk broadly about strategy though.

Joe Biden: (18:20)
Can I respond to that?

Moderator: (18:21)
30 seconds, please. Then I have a question.

Joe Biden: (18:23)
Number one, he says that we’re learning to live with it. People are learning to die with it. You folks home will have an empty chair at the kitchen table this morning. That man or wife going to bed tonight and reaching over to try to touch, there out of habit, where their wife or husband was, is gone. Learning to live with it. Come on. We’re dying with it, because he’s never said. See, you said, “It’s dangerous.” When’s the last time? Is it really dangerous still? Are we dangerous. You tell the people it’s dangerous now. What should they do about the danger? And you say, “I take no responsibility.”

Moderator: (18:56)
Let me talk about your Tuesday-

Donald Trump: (18:58)
Excuse me. I take full responsibility. It’s not my fault that it came here. It’s China’s fault. And you know what? It’s not Joe’s fault that it came here either. It’s China’s fault. They kept it from going into the rest of China for the most part, but they didn’t keep it from coming out to the world, including Europe and ourselves.

Moderator: (19:16)
Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (19:17)
The fact is that when we knew it was coming, when it hit, what happened? What did the President say? He said, “Don’t worry. It’s going to go away. It’ll be gone by Easter. Don’t worry. Warm weather. Don’t worry. Maybe inject bleach.” He said he was kidding when he said that, but a lot of people thought it was serious. A whole range of things the President has said, even today, he thinks we are in control. We’re about to lose 200,000 more people.

Moderator: (19:43)
President Trump.

Donald Trump: (19:44)
Look, perhaps just to finish this, I was kidding on that, but just to finish this, when I closed he said I shouldn’t have closed. And that went on for months. Nancy Pelosi said the same thing. She was dancing on the streets in Chinatown, in San Francisco. But when I closed, he said, “This is a terrible thing, you xenophobic.” I think he called me racist even, because I was closing it to China. Now he says I should have closed it earlier. Joe, it doesn’t.

Joe Biden: (20:13)
I didn’t say either of those things.

Donald Trump: (20:14)
You certainly did. You certainly did.

Joe Biden: (20:17)
I talked about his xenophobia in a different context. It wasn’t about closing the border to Chinese coming to the United States.

Moderator: (20:24)
All right, I want to talk about both of your different strategies to handling this.

Donald Trump: (20:27)
He thought I shouldn’t have closed the border, that’s obvious.

Moderator: (20:31)
Do you want to respond to that quickly, Vice President Biden?

Joe Biden: (20:33)
No.

Moderator: (20:33)
Okay. Let’s talk about your different strategies toward dealing with this. Mr. Vice President you suggested you would support new shutdowns if scientists recommended it. What do you say to Americans who are fearful that the cost of shutdowns, the impact on the economy, the higher rates of hunger, depression, domestic, and substance abuse outweighs the risk of exposure to the virus?

Joe Biden: (20:54)
What I would say is, I’m going to shut down the virus, not the country. It’s his ineptitude that caused the country to have to shut down in large part, why businesses have gone under, why schools are closed, why so many people have lost their living, and why they’re concerned. Those other concerns are real. That’s why he should have been, instead of in a sand trap at his golf course, he should have been negotiating with Nancy Pelosi and the rest of the Democrats and Republicans about what to do about the acts they were passing for billions of dollars to make sure people had the capacity.

Moderator: (21:23)
But you haven’t ruled out more shut downs?

Joe Biden: (21:25)
Oh, well, no. I’m not shutting down today, but there are … Look, you need standards. The standard is, if you have a reproduction rate in a community that’s above a certain level, everybody says, “Slow up. More social distancing. Do not open bars and do not open gymnasiums. Do not open until you get this under control, under more control.” But when you do open, give the people the capacity to be able to open and have the capacity to do it safely. For example, schools. Schools, they need a lot of money to be open. They need to deal with ventilation systems. They need to deal with smaller classes, more teachers, more pods, and he’s refused to support that money, or at least up to now.

Moderator: (22:04)
Let’s talk about schools, President Trump-

Donald Trump: (22:06)
I think we have to respond, if I might.

Moderator: (22:07)
Please. And then I have a follow-up.

Donald Trump: (22:09)
Thank you, and I appreciate that. Look, all he does is talk about shut downs. But forget about him. His Democrat Governors, Cuomo in New York, you look at what’s going on in California, you look at Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Democrats, Democrats all, they’re shut down so tight and they’re dying. They’re dying. And he supports all these people. All he talks about is shut downs. No, we’re not going to shut down. And we have to open our schools. And it’s like, as an example, I have a young son, he also tested positive. By the time I spoke to the doctor the second time, he was fine. It just went away. Young people, I guess, it’s their immune system.

Moderator: (22:47)
Let me follow up with you, President Trump. You’ve demanded schools open in person and insist they can do it safely. But just yesterday, Boston became the latest city to move its public school system entirely online after a coronavirus spike. What is your message to parents who worry that sending their children to school will endanger not only their kids but also their teachers and family?

Donald Trump: (23:05)
I want to open the schools. The transmittal rate to the teachers is very small. But I want to open the schools. We have to open our country. We’re not going to have a country. You can’t do this. We can’t keep this country closed. This is a massive country with a massive economy. People are losing their jobs. They’re committing suicide. There’s depression, alcohol, drugs at a level that nobody’s ever seen before. There’s abuse, tremendous abuse. We have to open our country. I’ve said it often, the cure cannot be worse than the problem itself, and that’s what’s happening. And he wants to close down. He’ll close down the country if one person in our massive bureaucracy says we should close it down.

Moderator: (23:50)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (23:51)
Simply not true. We ought to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time. We ought to be able to safely open, but they need resources to open? You need to be able to, for example, if you’re going to open a business, have social distancing within the business. You need to have, if you have a restaurant, you need to have plexiglass dividers so people cannot infect one another. You need to be in a position where you can take testing rapidly and know whether the person is in fact infected. You need to be able to trace. You need to be able to provide all the resources that are needed to do this. And that is not inconsistent with saying that we’re going to make sure that we’re going to open safely. And by the way, all you teachers out there, not that many of you are going to die, so don’t worry about it. So don’t worry about it. Come on.

Moderator: (24:38)
President Trump, let me follow up with you quickly.

Donald Trump: (24:40)
By the way, I will say this, If you go and look at what’s happened to New York, it’s a ghost town. It’s a ghost town. And when you talk about plexiglass, these are restaurants that had dying. These are businesses with no money. Putting up plexiglass is unbelievably expensive, and it’s not the answer. I mean, you’re going to sit there in a cubicle wrapped around with plastic. These are businesses that are dying, Joe. You can’t do that to people. You just can’t. Take a look at New York and what’s happened to my wonderful city. For so many years, I loved it. It was vibrant. It’s dying. Everyone’s leaving New York.

Moderator: (25:15)
Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (25:15)
Take a look at what New York has done in terms of turning the curve down, in terms of the number of people dying. And I don’t look at this in terms of the way he does, blue states and red states. They’re all the United States. And look at the states that are having such a spike in the coronavirus. They’re the red states, they’re the states in the Midwest, they’re the states in the upper Midwest. That’s where the spike is occurring significantly. But they’re all Americans. They’re all Americans. And what we have to do is say, wear these masks, number one. Make sure we get the help that the businesses need. That money’s already been passed to do that. It’s been out there since the beginning of the summer, and nothing’s happened.

Donald Trump: (25:55)
Kristen, New York has lost more than 40,000 people, 11,000 people in nursing homes.

Moderator: (26:02)
President Trump, what about-

Donald Trump: (26:02)
When you say spike, take a look at what’s happening in Pennsylvania where they’ve had it closed. Take a look at what’s happening with your friend in Michigan, where her husband’s the only one allowed to do anything. It’s been like a prison. Now, it was just ruled unconstitutional. Take a look at North Carolina, they’re having spikes and they’ve been closed, and they’re getting killed financially. We can’t let that happen, Joe. You can’t let that happen. We have to open up. And we understand the disease. We have to protect our seniors. We have to protect our elderly. We have to protect especially our seniors with heart problems and diabetes problems. And we will protect. We have the best testing in the world by far. That’s why we have so many cases.

Moderator: (26:44)
Let me follow up with you before we move on to our next section. President Trump, this week, you called Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s best known infectious disease expert “a disaster.” You described him and other medical experts as “idiots.” If you’re not listening to them, who are you listening to?

Donald Trump: (26:58)
I’m listening to all of them, including Anthony. I get along very well with Anthony.

Donald Trump: (27:02)
… think to all of them, including Anthony. I get along very well with Anthony, but he did say, “Don’t wear masks.” He did say, as you know, “This is not going to be a problem.” I think he’s a Democrat, but that’s okay. He said, “This is not going to be a problem. We are not going to have a problem at all.” When Joe says that I said, Anthony Fauci said, and others, and many others. And I’m not knocking him, nobody knew. Look, nobody knew what this thing was. Nobody knew where it was coming from, what it was. We’ve learned a lot. But Anthony said “Don’t wear masks,” now he wants to wear masks. Anthony also said, if you look back, exact words, here’s his exact words. “This is no problem. This is going to go away soon.” So he’s allowed to make mistakes. He happens to be a good person.

Moderator: (27:44)
Vice President Biden, your response quickly, and then we’re going to move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (27:48)
My response is that think about what the President knew in January and didn’t tell the American people. He was told this was a serious virus that spread in the air, and it was much worse, much worse, than the flu. He went on record and said to one of your colleagues, recorded, that in fact he knew how dangerous it was but he didn’t want to tell us. He didn’t want to tell us because he didn’t want us to panic. He didn’t want us… Americans don’t panic. He panicked. But guess what, in the meantime, we find out in the New York Times the other day, that in fact his folks went to Wall Street and said, “This is a really dangerous thing.” And a memo out of that meeting — not from his administration, but from some of the brokers — said, “Sell short, because we’ve got to get moving. It’s a dangerous problem.”

Donald Trump: (28:31)
Well, this is what I-

Moderator: (28:31)
I’m going to give you 30 seconds to respond and then we’re going to move on.

Donald Trump: (28:34)
[crosstalk 00:28:34] I don’t know. Somebody went through Wall Street. You’re the one that takes all the money from Wall Street. I don’t take it.

Joe Biden: (28:39)
I haven’t-

Donald Trump: (28:39)
Joe, you have raised a lot of money, tremendous amounts of money. And every time you raise money deals are made, Joe. I could raise so much more money. As President, and as somebody that knows most of those people, I could call the heads of Wall Street, the heads of every company in America. I would blow away every record. But I don’t want to do that because it puts me in a bad position. And then you bring up Wall Street? You shouldn’t be bringing up Wall Street, because you’re the one that takes the money from Wall Street, not me. I could blow away your records like you wouldn’t believe. We don’t need money. We have plenty of money. In fact, we beat Hillary Clinton with a tiny fraction of the money that she was able to [crosstalk 00:29:15]

Moderator: (29:15)
All right, gentlemen, we’re going to move on.

Donald Trump: (29:16)
Don’t tell me about [crosstalk 00:29:17].

Joe Biden: (29:18)
Average contribution, $43.

Moderator: (29:19)
All right. We’re going to move on to our next section, which is national security. And I do want to start with the security of our elections and some breaking news from overnight. Just last night, top intelligence officials confirmed again that both Russia and Iran are working to influence this election. Both countries have obtained US voter registration information, these officials say, and Iran sent intimidating messages to Florida voters. This question goes to you, Mr. Vice President. What would you do to put an end to this threat? You have two minutes, uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (29:49)
I made it clear and I asked everyone else to take the pledge. I made it clear that any country, no matter who it is, that interferes in American elections will pay a price. They will pay a price. And it’s been overwhelmingly clear this election — I won’t even get into the last one — this election, that Russia has been involved, China’s been involved to some degree, and now we learn that Iran is involved. They will pay a price if I’m elected. They’re interfering with American sovereignty. That’s what’s going on right now. They’re interfering with American sovereignty.

Joe Biden: (30:23)
And to the best of my knowledge, I don’t think the President has said anything to Putin about it. I don’t think he’s talking to them a lot. I don’t think he’s said a word. I don’t know why he hasn’t said a word to Putin about it, and I don’t know what he has recently said, if anything, to the Iranians. My guess is he’d probably be more outspoken with regard to the Iranians.

Joe Biden: (30:40)
But the point is this, folks. We are in a situation where we have foreign countries trying to interfere in the outcome of our election. His own National Security Advisor told him that what is happening with his buddy… Well, I shouldn’t… Well, I will. His buddy Rudy Giuliani. He’s being used as a Russian pawn. He’s being fed information that is Russian that is not true. And then what happens? Nothing happens. And then you find out that everything that’s going on here, about Russia is wanting to make sure that I do not get elected the next President of the United States, because they know I know them, and they know me.

Joe Biden: (31:20)
I don’t understand why this President is unwilling to take on Putin when he’s actually paying bounties to kill American soldiers in Afghanistan, when he’s engaged in activities that are trying to destabilize all of NATO. I don’t know why he doesn’t do it, but it’s worth asking the question. Why isn’t that being done? Any country that interferes with us will, in fact, pay a price, because they’re affecting our sovereignty.

Moderator: (31:45)
President Trump, same question to you. [crosstalk 00:31:48] Let me ask the question. You’re going to have two minutes to respond. For two elections in a row now, there has been substantial interference from foreign adversaries. What would you do in your next term to put an end to this? Two minutes, uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (31:58)
Well, let me respond to the first part, as Joe answered. Joe got $3.5 million from Russia and it came through Putin, because he was very friendly with the former mayor of Moscow and it was the mayor of Moscow’s wife. And you got $3.5 million. Your family got $3.5 million. And someday you’re going to have to explain, why did you get three and a half? I never got any money from Russia. I don’t get money from Russia.

Donald Trump: (32:22)
Now, about your thing last night. I knew all about that. And through John — who is John Ratcliffe, who is fantastic, DNI — he said the one thing that’s common to both of them.

Donald Trump: (00:00)
They both want you to lose because there has been nobody tougher to Russia between the sanctions, nobody tougher than me on Russia, between the sanctions, between all of what I’ve done with NATO. I’ve got the NATO countries to put up an extra $130 billion going to $420 billion a year. That’s to guard against Russia. I sold, while he was selling pillows and sheets, I sold tank busters to Ukraine. There has been nobody tougher on Russia than Donald Trump.

Donald Trump: (00:33)
And I’ll tell you, they were so bad. They took over the submarine port, you remember that very well, during your term, during you and Barack Obama. They took over a big part of what should have been Ukraine. You handed it to them. But you were getting a lot of money from Russia. They were paying you a lot of money, and they probably still are. But now, with what came out today, it’s even worse. All of the emails, the emails, the horrible emails of the kind of money that you were raking in, you and your family. And Joe, you were vice-president when some of this was happening, and it should have never happened. And I think you owe an explanation to the American people. Why is it, somebody just had a news conference a little while ago who was essentially supposed to work with you and your family, but what he said was damning. And regardless of me, I think you have to clean it up and talk to the American people. Maybe you can do it right now.

Moderator: (01:29)
Vice-President Biden, you may respond-

Joe Biden: (01:31)
[crosstalk 00:01:31].

Moderator: (01:31)
… and then I do want to follow up on the election security.

Joe Biden: (01:33)
I have not taken a penny from any foreign source ever in my life. We learned that this president paid 50 times the tax in China as a secret bank account with China, does business in China, and in fact, is talking about me taking money? I have not taken a single penny from any country, whatsoever, ever, number one.

Joe Biden: (01:57)
Number two, this is a president… I have released all of my tax returns, 22 years, go look at them, 22 years of my tax return. You have not released a single solitary year of your tax return. What are you hiding? Why are you unwilling? The foreign countries are paying you a lot. Russia’s paying you a lot. China’s paying you a lot on your hotels and all your businesses all around the country, all around the world. And China’s building a new road to a new golf course you have overseas. So, what’s going on here? Release your tax return or stop talking about corruption.

Moderator: (02:32)
President Trump, your response.

Donald Trump: (02:33)
First of all, I called my accountants, underwrote it, I’m going to release them as soon as we can. I want to do it. And it’ll show how successful, how great this company is. But much more importantly than that, people were saying $750. I asked them a week ago, I said, “What did I pay?” They said, “Sir, you prepaid tens of millions of dollars.” I prepaid my tax, over the last number of years, tens of millions of dollars, I prepaid, because at some point, they think it’s an estimate. They think I may have to pay tax. So I already prepaid it. Nobody told me that. Nobody told you that.

Moderator: (03:11)
Did your accountant tell you [crosstalk 00:03:11]?

Donald Trump: (03:11)
Excuse me. And it wasn’t written. Whenever they write this, they keep talking about $750, which I think is a filing fee, but let me just tell you, I prepaid millions and millions of dollars in taxes, number one.

Donald Trump: (03:23)
Number two, I don’t make money from China. You do. I don’t make money from Ukraine. You do. I don’t make money from Russia. You made $3.5 million, Joe, and your son gave you, they even have a statement that we have to give 10% to the big man. You’re the big man, I think. I don’t know, maybe you’re not, but you’re the big man, I think. Your son said we have to give 10% to the big men. Joe, what’s that all about? It’s terrible.

Moderator: (03:50)
All right, gentlemen. I want to ask you both some questions about all of this, but…

Joe Biden: (03:52)
I have to respond to that.

Moderator: (03:53)
I’m going to let you both respond very quickly. You just said you spoke to your accountant about potentially releasing your taxes, did he tell you when you can release them? Do you have a deadline for when you’re going to release them to the American people?

Donald Trump: (04:02)
As soon as the auditors finish. I get treated worse than the tea party got treated, because I have a lot of people in there-

Moderator: (04:07)
[crosstalk 00:04:06].

Donald Trump: (04:08)
… deep down in the IRS, they treat me horribly. We made a deal, it was all settled until I decide to run for president. I get treated very badly by the IRS, very unfairly, but we had a deal all done. As soon as we’re completed with the deal, I want to release it, but I have paid millions and millions of dollars and it’s worse than paying. I paid in advance. It’s called prepaying your taxes. I paid [crosstalk 00:04:32].

Moderator: (04:31)
Okay. I want to ask you both about questions regarding your potential foreign entanglements and questions that have been raised to give you both a chance to talk about this more broadly. Respond very quickly, and then I’ll get to my question.

Joe Biden: (04:43)
Why did he… he’s been saying this for four years, show us, just show us, stop playing around. You’ve been saying for four years you’re going to release your taxes.

Donald Trump: (04:52)
Everybody knows.

Joe Biden: (04:53)
Nobody knows, Mr. President. What they do know is you’re not paying your taxes, or you’re paying taxes that are so low, when last time he said, what he paid, he said, I only pay that little because I’m smart. I know how to game the system. Come on. Come on, folks.

Donald Trump: (05:10)
So…

Moderator: (05:11)
[crosstalk 00:05:11] President Trump, and then I want to get to two questions to both of you on this.

Joe Biden: (05:13)
Sure.

Donald Trump: (05:14)
I was put through a phony witch hunt for three years. It started before I even got elected. They spied of my campaign. No president should ever have to go through what I went through. Let me just say this, Mueller and 18 angry Democrats and FBI agents all over the place spent $48 million. They went through everything I had, including my tax returns, and they found absolutely no collusion and nothing wrong. $48 million. I guarantee you, if I spent $1 million on you, Joe, I could find plenty wrong because the kind of things-

Moderator: (05:52)
All right.

Donald Trump: (05:52)
… that you’ve done and the kind of monies that your family has taken, I mean, your brother made money in Iraq-

Moderator: (05:58)
Let me…

Donald Trump: (05:58)
… millions of dollars. Your other brother made a fortune, and it’s all through you, Joe. And they say you get some of it. And you do live very well, you have houses all over the place. You live very well.

Moderator: (06:08)
All right, gentlemen. Let me just ask some questions about all of this broadly. Vice-President Biden, there have been questions about the work your son has done in China and for a Ukrainian energy company when you were vice-president, in retrospect, was anything about those relationships inappropriate or unethical?

Joe Biden: (06:24)
Nothing was unethical. Here’s what the deal. With regard to Ukraine. We had this whole question about whether or not, because he was on the board, I later learned of Burisma, a company that somehow, I had done something wrong, yet every single solitary person, when he was going through his impeachment, testifying under oath, who work for him, said I did my job impeccably. I carried out U.S. policy, not one single solitary thing was out of line, not a single thing, number one.

Joe Biden: (06:57)
Number two, the guy who got in trouble in Ukraine was this guy trying to bribe the Ukrainian government to say something negative about me, which they would not do and did not do because it never ever, ever happened. My son has not made money in terms of this thing about, what are you talking about, China. I have not had… the only guy who made money from China is this guy. He’s the only one. Nobody else has made money from China.

Moderator: (07:25)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (07:25)
[crosstalk 00:07:25]…

Moderator: (07:26)
… let me ask my question to you [crosstalk 00:07:28]…

Donald Trump: (07:28)
But could I just one thing?

Moderator: (07:29)
Very quickly.

Donald Trump: (07:29)
His son didn’t have a job for a long time, was, sadly, no longer in the military service, I won’t get into that, and he didn’t have a job. As soon as he became vice-president, Burisma, not the best reputation in the world, I hear they paid him $183,000 a month, listen to this, $183,000, and they gave him a $3 million upfront payment, and he had no energy experience. That’s 100% dishonest.

Moderator: (07:55)
All right. I’m going to let the vice-president respond to that quickly, and then I need to get to a question to you. Very quickly, Mr. Vice-President.

Joe Biden: (08:01)
No basis for that. Everybody investigated that. No one said anything he did was wrong in Ukraine.

Moderator: (08:03)
Okay. President Trump, this is for you. Since you took office, you’ve never divested from your business. You’ve personally promoted your properties abroad. A report this week, which was referenced, does indicate that your company has a bank account in China. So how can voters know that you don’t have any foreign conflicts of interest?

Donald Trump: (08:19)
I have many bank accounts and they’re all listed and they’re all over the place. I mean, I was a businessman doing business. The bank account you’re referring to, which is, everybody knows about it, it’s listed, the bank account was in 2013. That’s what it was. It was opened. It was closed in 2015, I believe. And then I decided, because I was going to do… I was thinking about doing a deal in China, like millions of other people, I was thinking about it and I decided I’m not going to do it, didn’t like it, I decided not to do it, had an account open and I closed it.

Moderator: (08:54)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (08:54)
Excuse me. And then, unlike him where he’s vice-president and he does business, I then decided to run for president after that. That was before. So I closed it before I even ran for president, let alone became president, big difference. He is the vice-president of the United States and his son, his brother, and his other brother are getting rich. They’re like a vacuum cleaner. They’re sucking up money [crosstalk 00:09:20].

Moderator: (09:19)
Okay. President Trump, thank you. We do need to move on.

Joe Biden: (09:21)
Not true.

Moderator: (09:22)
I do want to ask you, Vice-President Biden, about China. Let’s talk about China more broadly. There have, of course, President Trump has said that they should pay for not being fully transparent in regards to the coronavirus. If you were president, would you make China pay? And please be specific, what would that look like?

Joe Biden: (09:41)
What I’d make China do is play by the international rules, not like he has done. He has caused the deficit of the China to go up, not down, with China, up, not down. We are making sure that in order to do business in China, you have to give all your intellectual property. You have to have a partner in China. It’s 51%, we would not do that at all, number one.

Joe Biden: (10:03)
Number two, we’re in a situation where China would have to play by the rules internationally as well. When I met with Xi and when I was still vice-president, he said we’re setting up air identification zones in the South China Sea. You can’t fly through them. I said we’re going to fly through them. We just flew B-52, B-1 bombers through it. We’re not going to pay attention. They have to play by the rules. And what’s he do? He embraces guys like the thugs, like in North Korea and the Chinese president and Putin and others, and he pokes his finger [inaudible 00:10:36] all of our friends, all of our allies. We make up only… we’re 25%, 25% of the world’s economy. We need to be having the rest of our friends with us saying to China, “These are the rules. You play by them, or you’re going to pay the price for not paying by them economically.”

Joe Biden: (10:54)
That’s the way I will run it, and that’s what we did and upholding steel tariffs and a range of other things when we were president and vice-president.

Moderator: (11:01)
All right. Let’s talk about North Korea.

Donald Trump: (11:02)
No, no, no.

Moderator: (11:03)
Let…

Donald Trump: (11:03)
Excuse me. No, I have to…

Joe Biden: (11:03)
… and Vice President.

Moderator: (11:03)
All right, let’s talk about North Korea-

Donald Trump: (11:03)
Excuse me. No, I have to respond to that.

Moderator: (11:05)
Okay. Very quickly, and then we’re going to move on to North Korea.

Donald Trump: (11:07)
His son walked out with a billion and a half dollars from China to …

Joe Biden: (11:08)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (11:10)
… after spending 10 minutes in office and being in Air Force Two. Number one. Number two, there’s a very strong email talking about your family wanting to make $10 million a year for introductions.

Moderator: (11:22)
President Trump, on China policy-

Joe Biden: (11:24)
That’s not true.

Moderator: (11:24)
… though, what specifically-

Donald Trump: (11:24)
No, but wait a minute.

Moderator: (11:25)
What are you going to do, what specifically are you going to do to make China pay? You’ve said you’re going to make them pay.

Donald Trump: (11:30)
First of all, China is paying. They’re paying billions and billions of dollars. I just gave $28 billion.

Moderator: (11:35)
New sanctions?

Donald Trump: (11:36)
I just gave $28 billion to our farmers.

Joe Biden: (11:39)
Tax payer’s money.

Donald Trump: (11:41)
It’s what?

Joe Biden: (11:42)
Taxpayer’s money. Didn’t come from China.

Donald Trump: (11:44)
No, no. You know who the taxpayer is? It’s called China.

Joe Biden: (11:46)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (11:46)
China pays 28 billion, and you know what they did to pay it, Joe? They devalued their currency and they also paid up, and you know got the money? Our farmers, our great farmers, because they were targeted. You never charged them anything. Also, I charged them 25% on dumped steel, because they were killing our steel industry. We were not going to have a steel industry.

Moderator: (12:06)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (12:06)
And now we have a steel industry.

Moderator: (12:07)
Okay. Vice President Biden, your response, please.

Joe Biden: (12:09)
My response is, look, there’s a reason why he’s bringing up all this malarkey. There’s a reason for it. He doesn’t want to talk about the substantive issues. It’s not about his family and my family. It’s about your family, and your family’s hurting badly. If you’re a middle-class family, you’re getting hurt badly right now. You’re sitting at the kitchen table this morning deciding, “Well, we can’t get new tires. They’re bald, because we have to wait another month or so.” Or, “Are we going to be able to pay the mortgage?” Or, “Who’s going to tell her she can’t go back to community college?” They’re the decisions you’re making, and the middle-class families like I grew up in Scranton and Claymont, they’re in trouble. We should be talking about your families, but that’s the last thing he wants to talk about.

Donald Trump: (12:53)
That is a typical statement.

Joe Biden: (12:54)
I want to talk about North Korea.

Donald Trump: (12:56)
Excuse me. Just for one second, please.

Moderator: (12:57)
10 seconds, Mr. President. 10 seconds.

Donald Trump: (12:59)
That’s a typical political statement. Let’s get off this China thing, and then he looks, “The family around the table, everything.” Just a typical politician when I see that. I’m not a typical politician.

Moderator: (13:07)
Let’s talk about North Korea now.

Donald Trump: (13:08)
That’s why I got elected. Let’s get off the subject of China. Let’s talk about sitting around the table. Come on, Joe. You could do better.

Moderator: (13:16)
We’re going to talk about North Korea now. President Trump, you’ve met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un three times. You’ve talked about your beautiful letters with him. You’ve touted the fact that there hasn’t been a war or a long range missile test, and yet North Korea recently rolled out its biggest ever intercontinental ballistic missile and continues to develop its nuclear arsenal. Do you see that as a betrayal of the relationship you forged.

Donald Trump: (13:38)
No.

Moderator: (13:38)
Just 30 seconds here because we need to get onto the next topic.

Donald Trump: (13:40)
So when I met with Barack Obama, we sat in the White House, right at the beginning, had a great conversation. Was supposed to be 15 minutes and it was well over an hour. He said, “The biggest problem we have is North Korea.” He indicated we will be in a war with North Korea. Guess what? It would be a nuclear war. And he does have plenty of nuclear capability. In the meantime, I have a very good relationship with him. Different kind of a guy, but he probably thinks the same thing about me. We have a different kind of a relationship. We have a very good relationship and there’s no war. And about two months ago, he broke into a certain area. They said, “Oh, there’s going to be trouble.” I said, “No, they’re not, because he’s not going to do that.” And I was right. Look, instead of being in a war where millions of people, Seoul is 25 miles away, millions and millions, 32 million people. Millions of people would be dead right now. We don’t have a war and I have a good relationship.

Moderator: (14:31)
President Trump, that’s 30 seconds. Vice President Biden to you. North Korea conducted four nuclear tests under the Obama administration. Why do you think you would be able to reign in this persistent threatening?

Joe Biden: (14:42)
Because I’d make it clear, which we were making clear to China, they had to be part of the deal, because I made it clear as a spokesperson for the illustration when I went to China that I said, “Why are you moving your missile defense up so close? Why are you moving more forces here? Why are you continue to do military maneuvers with South Korea?” I said, “Because North Korea is a problem, and we’re going to continue to do it so we can control them. We’re going to make sure we can control them and make sure they can not hurt us. And so if you want to do something about it, step up and help. If not, it’s going to continue.” What has he done? He’s legitimized North Korea. He’s talked about his good buddy, who’s a thug, a thug. And he talks about how we’re better off. And they have much more capable missiles, able to reach us territory much more easily than they ever did before.

Moderator: (15:31)
Let me follow up with you, Vice President Biden. You’ve said you wouldn’t meet with Kim Jong-un without preconditions. Are there any conditions under which you would meet with him?

Joe Biden: (15:39)
On the condition that he would agree that he would be drawing down his nuclear capacity. The Korean Peninsula should be a nuclear free zone.

Moderator: (15:48)
All right. Let’s move on to American families.

Donald Trump: (15:51)
Kristen.

Moderator: (15:51)
Very quickly, 10 seconds, President Trump.

Donald Trump: (15:53)
They tried to meet with him. He wouldn’t do it. He didn’t like Obama. He didn’t like him. He wouldn’t do it.

Moderator: (15:59)
Okay, I’ve got to give him a chance to respond to that before we move on.

Donald Trump: (16:01)
I know for a fact. They tried. We wouldn’t do it. And that’s okay. You know what? North Korea, we’re not in a war. We have a good relationship. People don’t understand. Having a good relationship with leaders of other countries is a good thing.

Moderator: (16:12)
President Trump, we have to move on, because we have a lot of questions to get to. Your response.

Joe Biden: (16:15)
We had a good relationship with Hitler before he, in fact, invaded Europe, the rest of Europe. Come on. The reason he would not meet with President Obama is because President Obama said, “We’re going to talk about denuclearization. We’re not going to legitimize you and we’re going to continue to push stronger and stronger sanctions on you.” That’s why he wouldn’t meet with us.

Moderator: (16:36)
All right, let’s move on.

Donald Trump: (16:38)
And it didn’t happen.

Moderator: (16:38)
Let’s move on and talk about American families.

Donald Trump: (16:38)
Excuse me. He left me a mess. Kristen.

Moderator: (16:40)
President Trump. Okay

Donald Trump: (16:41)
They left me a mess. North Korea was a mess, and in fact, if you remember the first two or three months. It was a very dangerous period in my first three months before we worked things out a little bit.

Moderator: (16:54)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (16:54)
There was a very day. They left us a mess, and Obama would be, I think, the first to say it, was the single biggest problem he thought that our country [crosstalk 00:17:03].

Moderator: (17:03)
Okay, let’s move on to American families and the economy. One of the issues that’s most important to them is healthcare, as you both know. Today, there was a key vote on a new Supreme Court Justice, Amy Coney Barrett, and healthcare is at the center of her confirmation fight. Over 20 million Americans get their health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. It’s headed to the Supreme Court and your administration, Mr. President, is advocating for the court to overturn it. If the Supreme Court does overturn that law, there’s 20 million Americans could lose their health insurance almost overnight. So what would you do if those people have their health insurance taken away? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (17:40)
First of all, I’ve already done something that nobody thought was possible. Through the legislature, I terminated the individual mandate. That is the worst part of Obamacare, as we call it. The individual mandate where you have to pay a fortune for the privilege of not having to pay for bad health insurance, I terminated. It’s gone. Now, it’s in court, because Obamacare is no good. But then I made a decision, run it as well as you can, to my people, great people, run it as well as you can. I could have gone the other route and made everybody very unhappy. They ran it. Premiums are down. Everything’s down. Here’s the problem. No matter how well you run it, it’s no good. What we’d like to do is terminate it. We have the individual mandate done. I don’t know that it’s going to work. If we don’t win, we will have to run it and we’ll have Obamacare, but it’ll be better run. But it no longer is Obamacare, because without the individual mandate, it’s much different.

Donald Trump: (18:36)
Pre-existing conditions will always stay. What I would like to do is a much better healthcare, much better. We’ll always protect people with pre-existing. So I’d like to terminate Obamacare, come up with a brand new, beautiful healthcare. The Democrats will do it, because there’ll be tremendous pressure on them. And we might even have the House by that time. And I think we’re going to win the House. You’ll see, but I think we’re going to win the House. But come up with a better healthcare, always protecting people with pre-existing conditions. And one thing very important, we have 180 million people out there that have great private healthcare. Far more than we’re talking about with Obamacare. Joe Biden is going to terminate all of those policies. These are people that love their healthcare. People that have been successful, middle-income people, been successful. They have 180 million plans, 180 million people, families. Under what he wants to do, which will basically be socialized medicine, he won’t even have a choice, they want to terminate 180 million plans. We have done an incredible job at healthcare, and we’re going to do even better. Just you watch.

Moderator: (19:43)
Okay. Vice President Biden, yes, this is for you. Your healthcare plan calls for building on Obamacare. So my question is, what is your plan if the law is ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court? You have two minutes uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (19:56)
What I’m going to do is pass Obamacare with a public option, and become Bidencare. The public option is an option that says that if you in fact do not have the wherewithal, if you qualify for Medicaid and you do not have the wherewithal in your state to get Medicaid, you automatically are enrolled, providing competition for insurance companies. That’s what’s going to happen. Secondly, we’re going to make sure we reduce the premiums and reduce drug prices by making sure that there’s competition, that doesn’t exist now, by allowing Medicare to negotiate drug prices with the insurance companies. Thirdly, the idea that I want to eliminate private insurance, the reason why I had such a fight with 20 candidates for the nomination was I support private insurance. That’s why. Not one single person with private insurance would lose their insurance under my plan, nor did they under Obamacare. They did not lose their insurance unless they chose they wanted to go to something else.

Joe Biden: (20:59)
Lastly, we’re going to make sure we’re in a situation that we actually protect pre-existing. There’s no way he can protect pre-existing conditions. None, zero. You can’t do it in the ether. He’s been talking about this for a long time. He’s never come up with a plan. I guess we’re going to get the pre-existing condition plan the same time we got the infrastructure plan that we waited for since ’17, ’18, ’19, and 20. I still have a few more minutes. I know you’re getting anxious. The fact is that he’s already cost the American people, because of his terrible handling of the COVID virus and economic spillover. 10 million people have lost their private insurance, and he wants to take away 22 million more people who have it under Obamacare and over 110 million people with pre-existing conditions. And all the people from COVID are going to have pre-existing conditions, what are they going to do?

Moderator: (21:51)
I have a follow-up for you Vice President Biden. It relates to something that President Trump said. He’s accusing you of wanting socialized medicine. What do you say to people who have concerns that your healthcare plan, which includes a government insurance option, takes-

Moderator: (22:03)
Concerns that your healthcare plan, which includes a government insurance option, takes the country one step closer to a healthcare system run entirely by the government. What’s your response to that?

Joe Biden: (22:09)
I say it’s ridiculous. It’s like saying that the fact that there’s a public option that people can choose, that makes it a socialist plan. Look, the difference between the president and I… I think healthcare is not a privilege, it’s a right. Everyone should have the right to have affordable healthcare, and I am very proud of my plan. It’s gotten endorsed by all the major labor unions, as well as a whole range of other people who, in fact, are concerned in the medical field. This is something that’s going to save people’s lives. And this is going to give some people an opportunity to have healthcare for their children. How many of you at home are worried and rolling around in bed tonight, wondering what in God’s name you’re going to do if you get sick, because you’ve lost your health insurance and your company’s gone under? We have to provide health insurance for people at an affordable rate, and that’s what I do.

Moderator: (23:00)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (23:00)
Excuse me. He was there-

Moderator: (23:01)
… your response.

Donald Trump: (23:02)
… for 47 years. He didn’t do it. He was now there as vice president for eight years. And it’s not like it was 25 years ago. It was three and three quarters… It was just a little while ago, right? Less than four years ago. He didn’t do anything. He didn’t do it. He wants socialized medicine. And it’s not that he wants it. His vice president, she is more liberal than Bernie Sanders and wants it even more. Bernie Sanders wants it. The Democrats want it. You’re going to have socialized medicine, just like you want it with fracking. “We’re not going to have fracking. We’re going to stop fracking. We’re going to stop fracking.” Then he goes to Pennsylvania after he gets a nomination, where he got very lucky to get it. And he goes to Pennsylvania, and he says, “Oh, we’re going to have fracking.” And you never ask that question. And by the way, so far, I respect very much the way you’re handling this, I have to say.

Joe Biden: (23:50)
By the way-

Donald Trump: (23:50)
But somebody should ask the question.

Joe Biden: (23:52)
You can ask it.

Donald Trump: (23:52)
He goes for a year, there will be no fracking.

Moderator: (23:55)
We do have a number-

Donald Trump: (23:56)
There will be no petroleum-

Moderator: (23:56)
We have a number of topics we’re going to get to.

Donald Trump: (24:00)
No, no. But that’s a big question.

Moderator: (24:01)
We’re going to get to a number of topics-

Donald Trump: (24:01)
It’s the same thing with socialized medicine.

Joe Biden: (24:03)
I have to respond to healthcare.

Moderator: (24:04)
Vice President, your response please.

Joe Biden: (24:04)
My response is, people deserve to have affordable healthcare, period. Period, period, period. And the Biden care proposal will in fact provide for that affordable healthcare, lower premiums. What we’re going to do is going to cost some money. It’s going to cost over $750 billion over 10 years to do it. And they’re going to have lower premiums. You can buy into the better plans, the cheaper plans, lower your premiums, deal with unexpected billing, and have your drug prices drop significantly. He keeps talking about it. He hasn’t done a thing for anybody on healthcare. Not a thing.

Donald Trump: (24:37)
Kristen, when he says-

Moderator: (24:38)
Very quickly, then I want to talk about what’s happening on Capitol Hill.

Donald Trump: (24:39)
When he says public option, he’s talking about socialized medicine and healthcare. When he talks about a public option, he’s talking about destroying your Medicare, totally destroying-

Joe Biden: (24:49)
Wrong.

Donald Trump: (24:49)
… and destroying your Social Security. And this whole country will come down. Bernie Sanders tried it in his state.

Joe Biden: (24:56)
Bernie.

Donald Trump: (24:56)
He tried it in his state. His governor was a very liberal governor. They wanted to make it work.

Moderator: (25:00)
Okay. Let’s hear-

Donald Trump: (25:01)
It was impossible to work.

Moderator: (25:02)
Let’s let Vice President Biden respond-

Donald Trump: (25:04)
It doesn’t work.

Joe Biden: (25:05)
He’s a very confused guy. He thinks he’s running against somebody else. He’s running against Joe Biden. I beat all those other people because I disagreed with them. Joe Biden, he’s running against. And the idea that we’re in a situation that is going to destroy Medicare… This is the guy that the actuary of Medicare said, “If in fact…” That’s Social Security. “If in fact he continues his plan to withhold the tax on Social Security, Social Security will be bankrupt by 2023 with no way to make up for it.” This is the guy who’s tried to cut Medicare. The idea that Donald Trump is lecturing me on Social Security and Medicare? Come on.

Donald Trump: (25:48)
He tried to get rid of-

Moderator: (25:49)
10 seconds, Mr. President, and then I have to go to another question.

Donald Trump: (25:49)
He tried to hurt Social Security years ago. Years ago. Go back and look at the records. He tried to hurt Social Security years ago. One thing. But this is the guy-

Moderator: (25:57)
All right. Let’s move on. I’m going to move on.

Donald Trump: (25:59)
… that when they announced last week-

Moderator: (26:00)
Mr. President, I have to move on to the next question or else we’re not going to have time to talk about it.

Donald Trump: (26:02)
They say the stock market will boom if I’m elected. If he’s elected, the stock market will crash.

Moderator: (26:09)
Okay. Let’s move on to the next question.

Donald Trump: (26:09)
The biggest analysts are saying that.

Joe Biden: (26:10)
May I respond?

Moderator: (26:10)
Very quickly.

Joe Biden: (26:12)
Look, the idea that the stock market is booming is his only measure of what’s happening. Where I come from in Scranton and Claymont, the people don’t live off of the stock market. Just in the last three years, during this crisis, the billionaires in this country made, according to Wall Street, 700 billion more dollars. 700 billion more dollars. Because that’s his only measure. What happens to the ordinary people out there? What happens to them?

Moderator: (26:41)
Let’s talk about what’s happening on Capitol Hill.

Donald Trump: (26:44)
401(k)s. Kristen, 401(k)s are through the roof.

Moderator: (26:45)
We’re going to move on.

Donald Trump: (26:46)
People’s stock are through the roof.

Moderator: (26:47)
All right.

Donald Trump: (26:48)
And he doesn’t come from Scranton. He lived there for a short period of time before he even knew it.

Moderator: (26:54)
Okay. We’re going to move on to the next question.

Donald Trump: (26:55)
And he left. And the people of Pennsylvania will show you that.

Moderator: (26:57)
Let me move on to my next question, gentlemen.

Donald Trump: (26:57)
They understand.

Moderator: (26:58)
As of tonight, more than 12 million people are out of work. And as of tonight, 8 million more Americans have fallen into poverty, and more families are going hungry every day. Those hit hardest are women and people of color. They see Washington fighting over a relief bill. Mr. President, why haven’t you been able to get them the help they need? 30 seconds here.

Donald Trump: (27:18)
Because Nancy Pelosi doesn’t want to approve it. I do.

Moderator: (27:20)
But you’re the president.

Donald Trump: (27:22)
I do. But I still have to get, unfortunately… That’s one of the reasons I think we’re going to take over the House, because of her. Nancy Pelosi doesn’t want to approve anything because she’d love to have some victories on a date called November 3rd. Nancy Pelosi does not want to approve it. We are ready, willing, and able to do something. Don’t forget, we’ve already approved three plans. And it’s gone through, including the Democrats, in all fairness. This one, she doesn’t want. It’s near the election. Because she thinks it helps her politically. I think it hurts her politically.

Moderator: (27:50)
All right, Mr. Vice President-

Joe Biden: (27:51)
By the way, as you know, the Republican leader in the United States Senate said he can’t pass it. He will be able to pass it. He does not have Republican votes. Why isn’t he talking to his Republican friends?

Moderator: (28:02)
Let me follow up with you, Vice President Biden because-

Donald Trump: (28:04)
If we made a deal, the Republicans will pass it.

Moderator: (28:05)
Let me ask Vice President Biden a question. You are the leader of the Democratic party. Why have you not pushed the Democrats to get a deal for the American people?

Joe Biden: (28:13)
I have, and they have pushed it. Look, they passed this act all the way back in the beginning of the summer. It’s not new. It’s been out there. This HEROES Act has been sitting there. And look at what’s happening. When I was in charge of the recovery act with $800 billion, I was able to get $145 billion to local communities that have to balance their budgets and states that have to balance their budgets. And then they have to fire firefighters, teachers, first responders, law enforcement officers, so they could keep their cities and counties running. He will not support that. They have not done a thing for them. And Mitch McConnell said, “Let them go bankrupt. Let them go bankrupt.” Come on. What’s the matter with these guys?

Donald Trump: (28:56)
The bill that was passed in the House was a bailout of badly run, high crime, Democrat, all run by Democrat cities and states. It was a way of getting a lot of money, billions and billions of dollars, to these guys. It was also a way of getting a lot of money from our people’s pockets to people that come into our country illegally. We were going to take care of everything for them. And I’d love to do that. I’d love to help them. But what that does, everybody all over the world will start pouring into our country. We can’t do it. This was a way of taking care of them. This was a way of spending on things that had nothing to do with COVID, as per your question. But it was really a big bailout for badly run Democrat cities and states.

Moderator: (29:39)
All right. I want to-

Joe Biden: (29:40)
By the way, if I get elected, I’m not going to… I’m running as a proud Democrat, but I’m going to be an American president. I don’t see red states and blue states. What I see is American United States. And folks, every single state out there finds themself in trouble. They’re going to start laying off, whether they’re red or blue, cops, firefighters, first responders, teachers, because they have to balance their budget. And the founders were smart. They allowed the federal government to deficit spend to compensate for the United States of America.

Moderator: (30:10)
I want to talk about the minimum wage, gentlemen. Mr. Vice President, we are talking a lot about struggling small businesses and business owners these days. Do you think this is the right time to ask them to raise the minimum wage? You of course support a $15 federal minimum wage.

Joe Biden: (30:24)
I do, because I think one of the things we’re going to have to do is we’re going to have to bail them out too. We should be bailing them out now, those small businesses. You got one in six of them going under. They’re not going to be able to make it back. They passed a package that allows us to be able… They call it PPP. Money is supposed to go to help them do everything from organize how they can deal with their businesses being open safely, schools, how they can make classrooms smaller, how they can hire more teachers, how they can put ventilation systems in. They need the help. The businesses, as well as the schools, need the help. These guys will not help them. It’s not giving them any of the money.

Moderator: (31:05)
We are going to move on to immigration, but I want to get-

Donald Trump: (31:06)
Excuse me. One thing very quickly. He said we have to help our small businesses by raising the minimum wage. That’s not helping. I think it should be a state option. Alabama is different than New York. New York is different from Vermont. Every state is different. It should be a state option.

Moderator: (31:21)
You said very recently-

Donald Trump: (31:22)
It’s very important. We have to help our small businesses.

Moderator: (31:25)
You said-

Donald Trump: (31:25)
How are you helping your small businesses when you’re forcing wages? What’s going to happen, and what’s been proven to happen, is when you do that, these small businesses fire many of their employees.

Moderator: (31:35)
You said very recently-

Joe Biden: (31:35)
Not true, by the way.

Moderator: (31:36)
… you would consider raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour.

Donald Trump: (31:39)
Say it. Say it.

Moderator: (31:39)
You said recently you would consider raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour.

Donald Trump: (31:44)
What I really like, and I would consider it to an extent-

Moderator: (31:46)
In a second administration?

Donald Trump: (31:47)
But what I really like… In a second administration. But not to a level that’s going to put all these businesses out of business. It should be a state option. Look, I’ve lived-

Joe Biden: (31:55)
Every-

Donald Trump: (31:56)
… in different places. I know different places. They’re all different. Some places, $ 15 is not so bad. In other places, other states, $15 would be ruinings.

Moderator: (32:05)
Okay, President Trump, thank you. Quick response Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (32:09)
No one should work one job, be below poverty. People are making six, seven, eight bucks an hour. These first responders we all clap for as they come down the street because they’ve allowed us to make it. What’s happening? They deserve a minimum wage of $15. Anything below that puts you below the poverty level. And there is no evidence that when you raise the minimum wage, businesses go out of business. That is simply not true.

Moderator: (32:34)
We’re going to talk about immigration.

Joe Biden: (32:35)
It’s an [crosstalk 00:32:35]-

Moderator: (32:37)
We’re going to talk about immigration now, gentlemen. And we’re going to talk about families within this context. Mr. President, your administration separated children from their parents at the border, at least 4,000 kids. You’ve since reversed your zero tolerance policy, but the United States can’t locate the parents of more than 500 children. So how will these families ever be reunited?

Donald Trump: (32:57)
Children are brought here by coyotes and lots of bad people, cartels…

Donald Trump: (33:02)
[inaudible 00:33:00] and lots of bad people, cartels, and they’re brought here and they used to use them to get into our country. We now have as strong a border as we’ve ever had. We’re over 400 miles of brand new wall. You see the numbers. And we let people in, but they have to come in legally and they come in through [crosstalk 00:00:17]-

Moderator: (33:17)
But how will you reunite these kids with their families, Mr. President?

Donald Trump: (33:20)
But let me just tell you. Let me just tell you. They built cages. They used to say I built the cages, and then they had a picture in a certain newspaper, and it was the picture of these horrible cages and they said, “Look at these cages. President Trump built them.” And then it was determined they were built in 2014. That was him. They built cages.

Moderator: (33:39)
Do you have a plan to reunite the kids with their families?

Donald Trump: (33:39)
Yes. We’re working on it very… We’re trying very hard. But a lot of these kids come out without the parents. They come over through cartels and through coyotes and through gangs.

Moderator: (33:48)
Vice President Biden, let me bring you into this conversation. Quick response, and then another question to you.

Joe Biden: (33:52)
These 500-plus kids came with parents. They separated them at the border to make it a disincentive to come to begin with. “Be real tough. We’re really strong.” And guess what? They cannot… Coyotes didn’t bring them over. Their parents were with them. They got separated from their parents. And it makes us a laughingstock and violates every notion of who we are as a nation.

Moderator: (34:18)
Let me ask you a followup question.

Donald Trump: (34:19)
Kristen, they did it. We changed the policy. They did it. We changed.

Moderator: (34:22)
Your response to that?

Joe Biden: (34:22)
We did not separate the [crosstalk 00:34:25]-

Donald Trump: (34:26)
They built the cages. Who built the cages, Joe?

Joe Biden: (34:27)
Let’s talk about what we’re talking about.

Donald Trump: (34:28)
Who built the cages, Joe?

Joe Biden: (34:29)
Let’s talk about what we’re talking about. What happened? Parents were ripped… Their kids were ripped from their arms and separated, and now they cannot find over 500 of the sets of those parents, and those kids are alone. Nowhere to go. Nowhere to go. It’s criminal. It’s criminal.

Moderator: (34:49)
Let me ask you about [crosstalk 00:34:50] in 10 seconds and then I need to ask [crosstalk 00:34:53].

Donald Trump: (34:50)
Kristen, I will say this. They went down. We brought reporters, everything. They are so well taken care of. They’re in facilities that were so clean.

Moderator: (34:58)
But some of them haven’t been reunited with their families.

Donald Trump: (35:00)
They have gotten such good… But just ask one question. Who built the cages? I’d love you to ask him that. Who built the cages, Joe?

Moderator: (35:05)
Let me ask about your immigration policy, Mr. Vice President. The Obama Administration did fail to deliver immigration reform, which had been a key promise during the administration. It also presided over record deportations, as well as, family detentions at the border before changing course. So why should voters trust you with an immigration overhaul now?

Joe Biden: (35:23)
Because we made a mistake made. It took too long to get it right. Took too long to get it right. I’ll be President of the United States, not Vice President of the United States. And the fact is I’ve made it very clear. Within a 100 days, I’m going to send to the United States Congress a pathway to citizenship for over 11 million undocumented people. And all of those so-called dreamers, those DACA kids, they’re going to be immediately certified again to be able to stay in this country and put on a path to citizenship. The idea that they are being sent home by this guy and they want to do that is they’ve gone to they’ve never seen before. I can imagine. You’re five years old. Your parents are taking across the Rio Grande River and it’s illegal. And you say, “Oh, no, Mom. Leave me here. I’m not going to go with you.” They been here. Many of them are model citizens. Over 20,000 of them are first responders out there taking care of people during this crisis. We owe them. We owe them.

Moderator: (36:24)
President Trump, your reaction.

Donald Trump: (36:24)
Kristen, he had eight years to do what he said he was going to do. And I’ve changed. Without having a specific, we got rid of catch and release. We got rid of a lot of horrible things that they put in and that they lived with. But he had eight years he was Vice President. He did nothing except build cages to keep children in.

Moderator: (36:47)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (36:48)
The catch and release, you know what he’s talking about there? If in fact you had a family came across and they were arrested, they in fact were given a date to show up for their hearing. They were released. And guess what? They showed up for a hearing. And this is the first President in the history of the United States of America that anybody seeking asylum has to do it in another country. That’s never happened before in America. That’s never happened before in America. You come to the United States and you make your case that, “I seek asylum based on the following premise, why I deserve it under American law.” They’re sitting in squalor on the other side of the river.

Moderator: (37:27)
President Trump, your response. 30 seconds. And then we’ll move on.

Donald Trump: (37:29)
So important. It just shows that he has no understanding of immigration, of the laws. Catch and release is a disaster. A murderer would come in. A rapist would come in. A very bad person would come in. We would take their name. We have to release them into our country. And then you say they come back. Less than 1% of the people come back. We have to send ICE out and Border Patrol out to find them. We would say, “Come back in two years, three years. We’re going to give you a court case. You did Perry Mason. We’re going to give you a court case.” When you say they come back, they don’t come back, Joe. They never come back. Only the really… I hate to say this, but those with the lowest IQ, they might come back, but there are very, very few.

Moderator: (38:15)
Okay, President Trump. Let’s give Vice President Biden a chance to respond, and then we’re going to move on to the next section.

Donald Trump: (38:20)
You don’t know the law, Joe.

Moderator: (38:21)
Vice President Biden, your response.

Joe Biden: (38:22)
Know the law, what he’s telling you is simply not true. Check it out.

Donald Trump: (38:25)
Well, check it out. They don’t come back.

Joe Biden: (38:26)
Check it out.

Moderator: (38:27)
All right. Let’s move on to the next section.

Donald Trump: (38:28)
But we don’t have to worry about it, because they terminated it. So we don’t have to worry about it anymore, Joe.

Moderator: (38:30)
Let’s move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (38:32)
That’s right. And you 525 kids not knowing where in God’s name they’re going to be and lost their parents.

Donald Trump: (38:36)
Go ahead.

Moderator: (38:37)
All right. Let’s talk about our next section, which is race in America. And I want to talk about the way Black and Brown Americans experience race in this country. Part of that experience is something called the talk. It happens regardless of class and income, parents who feel they have no choice, but to prepare their children for the chance that they could be targeted, including by the police, for no reason other than the color of their skin. Mr. Vice President, in the next two minutes, I want you to speak directly to these families. Do you understand why these parents fear for their children?

Joe Biden: (39:14)
I do. I do. My daughter is a social worker and she’s written a lot about this. She has her graduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania in social work. And one of the reasons why I ended up working on the East Side of Wilmington, Delaware, which is 90% African-American, was to learn more about what was going on. I never had to tell my daughter if she’s pulled over, make sure she puts… For a traffic stop. “Put both hands on top of the wheel and don’t reach for the glove box because someone may shoot you.” But a Black parent, no matter how wealthy or how poor they are, has to teach their child, “When you’re walking down the street, don’t have a hoodie on when you go across the street.

Joe Biden: (00:00)
Making sure that you, in fact, if you get pulled over just, yes, sir, no, sir. Hands on top of the wheel. Because you are in fact, the victim, whether you’re a person making 300,000 … child of a $300,000 a year person or someone who’s on food stamps. The fact of the matter is, there is institutional racism in America. And we have always said, we’ve never lived up to it, that we hold these truths to be self-evident, all men and women are created equal. Well, guess what, we have never, ever lived up to it. But we’ve always constantly been moving the needle further and further to inclusion, not exclusion. This is the first president to come along and says, that’s the end of that. We’re not going to do that anymore. We have to provide for economic opportunity, better education, better healthcare, better access to schooling, better access to opportunity to borrow money to start businesses, all the things we can do. And I’ve laid out a clear plan as to how to do those things just to give people a shot. It’s about accumulating the ability to have wealth as well as it is to be free from violence.

Moderator: (01:06)
President Trump, same question to you, and let me remind you of the question. I would like you to speak directly to these families, do you understand why these parents fear for their children?

Donald Trump: (01:15)
Yes, I do. And again, he’s been in government 47 years, he never did a thing, except in 1994, when he did such harm to the black community, and they were called … and he called them superpredators. And he said that, he said it, superpredators. And they never lived that down. 1994, your crime bill, the superpredators. Nobody has done more for the black community than Donald Trump. And if you look, with the exception of Abraham Lincoln, possible exception, but the exception of Abraham Lincoln, nobody has done what I’ve done. Criminal justice reform, Obama and Joe didn’t do it. I don’t even think they tried because they had no chance at doing it. They might’ve wanted to do it. But if you had to see the arms I had to twist to get that done, it was not a pretty picture. And everybody knows it, including some very liberal people that cried in my office. They cried in the Oval Office.

Donald Trump: (02:15)
Two weeks later, they’re out saying, “Gee, we have to defeat him.” Criminal justice reform, prison reform, Opportunity Zones with Tim Scott, a great Senator from South Carolina. He came in with this incredible idea for Opportunity Zones. It’s one of the most successful programs. People don’t talk about it. Tremendous investment is being made, biggest beneficiary, the black and Hispanic communities. And then Historically Black Colleges and Universities, after three years of coming to the office, I love some of those guys, they were great. They came into the office and I said, “What are you doing?” After three years, I said, “Why do you keep coming back?” Because we have no funding.” I said, “You don’t have to come back every year.” “We have to come back.”

Donald Trump: (02:57)
Because President Obama would never give them long-term funding and I did. 10 year long-term funding and I gave them more money than they asked for because I said, “I think you need more.” And I said, “The only bad part about this is I may never see you again.” Because I got very friendly with them and they like me and I like them. But I saved Historically Black Colleges and Universities.

Moderator: (03:19)
Okay, and we’re going to talk about both of your records, but your response to that Vice President.

Joe Biden: (03:23)
My response to that is I never ever said what he accused me of saying. The fact of the matter is in 2000 though, after the crime bill had been in the law for awhile, this is a guy who said, “The problem with the crime bill, there’s not enough people in jail. There’s not enough people in jail.” And go on my website, get the quote, the date when he said it, “not enough people.” He talked about marauding gangs, young gangs, and the people who are going to maraud our cities. This is a guy who in the Central Park Five, five innocent black kids, he continued to push for making sure that they got the death penalty. None of them were guilty of the crimes they were suggested. Look and granted, he did in fact, let 20 people … he commuted 20 people’s sentences.

Joe Biden: (04:12)
We commuted over 1,000 people’s sentences, over 1,000. The very law he’s talking about is a law that in fact, initiated by Barack Obama. And secondly, we’re in a situation here where the federal prison system was reduced by 38,000 people under our administration. And one of those things we should be doing, there should be no, no minimum mandatories in the law. That’s why I’m offering $20 billion to states to change their state laws to eliminate minimum mandatories and set up drug courts. No one should be going to jail because they have a drug problem. They should be going to rehabilitation, not to jail. We should fundamentally change the system and that’s what I’m going to do.

Donald Trump: (04:53)
But why didn’t he do it four years ago? Why didn’t you do that four years ago? Even less than that. Why didn’t you when you vice president? You keep talking about all these things you’re going to do, and you’re going to do this, but you were there just a short time ago and you guys did nothing.

Joe Biden: (05:09)
We did-

Donald Trump: (05:09)
You know Joe, I ran because of you. I ran because of Barack Obama, because you did a poor job. If I thought you did a good job, I would’ve never run. I would’ve never run. I ran because of you. I’m looking at you now, you’re a politician, I ran because of you.

Moderator: (05:24)
All right, Vice President Biden, your response to that. And then I do have some questions for both of you.

Joe Biden: (05:28)
Well, I’ll tell you what I hope he does look at me because what’s happening here is, you know who I am. You know who he is, you know his character, you know my character, you know our reputations for honor and telling the truth. I am anxious to have this race. I’m anxious to see this take place. I am … The character of the country is on the ballot. Our character’s on the ballot, look at us closely.

Moderator: (05:52)
Let me ask some follow up-

Donald Trump: (05:53)
Excuse me-

Moderator: (05:53)
Please respond and then we’re going to have follow up questions.

Donald Trump: (05:55)
If this stuff is true about Russia, Ukraine, China, other countries, Iraq. If this is true, then he’s a corrupt politician. So don’t give me the stuff about how you’re this innocent baby. Joe, that calling you a corrupt politician-

Joe Biden: (06:09)
Nobody’s calling me-

Donald Trump: (06:10)
They’re calling it the laptop from hell.

Moderator: (06:10)
President Trump, I want to stay on the issue of race. We’re talking about the issue-

Donald Trump: (06:13)
Excuse me, [crosstalk 00:06:13] the laptop from hell.

Joe Biden: (06:13)
Nobody.

Moderator: (06:14)
President Trump, we’re talking about race right now. And I do want to stay on the issue of race. President Trump you-

Joe Biden: (06:20)
I have to respond to that. Because look-

Moderator: (06:21)
Please, very quickly.

Joe Biden: (06:22)
There are 50 former national intelligence folks who said that what he’s accusing me of is a Russian plant. They have said that this has all the … five former heads of the CIA, both parties, say what he’s saying is a bunch of garbage. Nobody believes it except him and his good friend, Rudy Giuliani.

Donald Trump: (06:44)
You mean the laptop is now another Russia, Russia, Russia hoax? You got to be kidding me-

Joe Biden: (06:51)
That’s exactly what was told.

Donald Trump: (06:51)
This is where he’s going. The laptop is Russia, Russia, Russia?

Moderator: (06:55)
Gentlemen, I want to stay on the issue of race.

Donald Trump: (06:56)
You have to be kidding, here we go again with the Russia. Boy, oh, boy.

Moderator: (06:59)
We’re going to continue on the issue of race.

Donald Trump: (07:01)
Can’t believe that one.

Moderator: (07:01)
Mr. President you’ve described the Black Lives Matter movement as a symbol of hate. You’ve shared a video of a man chanting white power to millions of your supporters. You’ve said that black professional athletes exercising their First Amendment rights should be fired. What do you say to Americans who say that kind of language from a president is contributing to a climate of hate and racial strife?

Donald Trump: (07:24)
Well, you have to understand the first time I ever heard of Black Lives Matter, they were chanting, “Pigs in a blanket,” talking about police, pigs, pigs, talking about our police. “Pigs in a blanket, fry them like bacon.” I said, “That’s a horrible thing.” And they were marching down the street. And that was my first glimpse of Black Lives Matter, I thought it was a terrible thing. As far as my relationships with all people, I think I have great relationships with all people. I am the least racist person in this room.

Moderator: (07:55)
What do you say to Americans who are concerned by that rhetoric [crosstalk 00:00:07:58]?

Donald Trump: (07:58)
I don’t know. I mean, I don’t know what to say. I got criminal justice reform done and prison reform and Opportunity Zones-

Donald Trump: (08:03)
… got criminal justice reform done, and prison reform, and Opportunity Zones, I took care of Black colleges and universities, I don’t know what to say, they can say anything, I mean, they can say anything. It’s a very… Makes me sad, because I am the least racist person, I can’t even see the audience because it’s so dark, but I don’t care who’s in the audience, I’m the least racist person in this room.

Moderator: (08:26)
Okay. Vice President Biden, let me ask you very quickly and then I have a follow-up question for you.

Joe Biden: (08:30)
Abraham Lincoln here is one of the most racist presidents we’ve had in modern history, he pours fuel on every single racist fire, every single one. Started off his campaign coming down the escalator saying he’s getting rid of those Mexican rapists, he’s ban Muslims because they’re Muslims, he has moved around and made everything worse across the board. He says to… About the Proud Boys, last time we were on stage here he said, “I tell them to stand down and stand ready.” Come on, this guy has a dog whistle about as big as a foghorn.

Moderator: (09:04)
President Trump, I’m going to give you 10 seconds to respond and then I have a follow-up question.

Donald Trump: (09:07)
No, he made a reference to Abraham Lincoln, where did that come in? I mean-

Joe Biden: (09:10)
You said you’re Abraham Lincoln.

Donald Trump: (09:12)
… where did that….. No.

Joe Biden: (09:13)
You said-

Donald Trump: (09:14)
I said, “Not since Abraham Lincoln has anybody done what I’ve done for the Black community.”

Joe Biden: (09:19)
And I’m saying-

Donald Trump: (09:20)
I didn’t say, “I’m Abraham Lincoln,” I said, “Not since Abraham Lincoln has anybody done what I’ve done for the Black community.” Now, you have done nothing other than the Crime Bill, which put-

Joe Biden: (09:32)
Oh, God.

Donald Trump: (09:33)
Tens of thousands of Black men, mostly, in jail.

Joe Biden: (09:39)
Not true.

Moderator: (09:39)
All right, let me ask Vice President Biden a question.

Donald Trump: (09:41)
And you know what? They remember it because if you look at what’s happening with the voting right now, they remember that you treated them very, very badly, just take a look at what’s happening out there.

Moderator: (09:49)
Let me ask Vice President Biden about… Vice President Biden, let me give you a chance to respond within this context, crime bills that you supported in the ’80s and ’90s contributed to the incarceration of tens of thousands of young Black men who had small amounts of drugs in their possession, they are sons, they are brothers, they are fathers, they are uncles, whose families are still to this day, some of them suffering the consequences. So, speak to those families, why should they vote for you?

Joe Biden: (10:11)
One of the things is that in the ’80s we passed 100 percent, all 100 senators voted for a bill on drugs and how to deal with drugs, it was a mistake. I’ve been trying to change since then particularly the portion on cocaine. That’s why I’ve been arguing that in fact we should not send anyone to jail for a pure drug offense, they should be going into treatment across the board, that’s what we should be spending money. And that’s why I set up drug courts which were never funded by our Republican friends. They should not be going to jail for a drug or an alcohol problem, they should be going into treatment. That’s what we’ve been trying to do, that’s what I’m going to get done because I think the American people have now seen that in fact it was a mistake to pass those laws relating to drugs, but they were not in the Crime Bill.

Moderator: (11:04)
[crosstalk 00:11:04].

Donald Trump: (11:04)
But, why didn’t he get it done? See, it’s all talk, no action with these politicians, why didn’t he get it? “That’s what I’m going to do when I become president.” You were vice president along with Obama as your president, your leader, for eight years, why didn’t you get it done? You had eight years to get it done, now you’re saying you’re going to get it done because you’re all talking and no action, Joe.

Moderator: (11:25)
Your response.

Joe Biden: (11:25)
We got a lot of it done. We released 38,000-

Donald Trump: (11:27)
You didn’t get anything done.

Joe Biden: (11:28)
We got 38,000 prisoners [ crosstalk 00:11:30]-

Donald Trump: (11:30)
You got nothing done.

Joe Biden: (11:31)
38,000 prisoners were released from federal prison, we have… There were over a thousand people who were given clemency. [inaudible 00:03:38]. In fact, were the ones that put in the legislation saying we could look at pattern and practice of police departments and what they were doing, how they’re conducting themselves. I could go on, but we began the process, we lost an election, that’s why I’m running to win back that election and change his terrible policy.

Donald Trump: (11:57)
I just have-

Moderator: (11:57)
Your response and then we’re going to move on to climate change.

Donald Trump: (11:58)
… one question, why didn’t you do it in the eight years, a short time ago? Why didn’t you do it? You just said, “I’m going to do that, I’m going to do this.” You put tens of thousands of mostly Black young men in prison, now you’re saying you’re going to get… You’re going to undo that, why didn’t you get it done? You had eight years with Obama. You know why, Joe? Because you’re all talk and no action.

Joe Biden: (12:22)
[crosstalk 00:00:12:23].

Moderator: (12:22)
All right, Vice President Biden, and then we’re going to move on to the next section.

Joe Biden: (12:25)
We had a Republican Congress, that’s the answer.

Moderator: (12:31)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (12:32)
Well, you got to talk them into it, Joe, sometimes you got to talk them into it.

Moderator: (12:35)
We’re going to move on to our next section which is climate change.

Donald Trump: (12:37)
… like I did with criminal justice reform, I had to talk Democrats into it.

Joe Biden: (12:41)
You did what we already had done.

Moderator: (12:41)
Gentlemen, we’re running out of time so we got to get onto climate change, please. You both have very different visions on climate change. President Trump, you say that environmental regulations have hurt jobs in the energy sector, Vice President Biden, you have said you see addressing climate change as an opportunity to create new jobs. For each of you, how would you both combat climate change and support job growth at the same time? Starting with you, President Trump, you have two minutes uninterrupted.

Donald Trump: (13:08)
So, we have the trillion trees program, we have so many different programs, I do love the environment, but what I want is that cleanest crystal clear water, the cleanest air. We have the best lowest number in carbon emissions, which is a big standard that I noticed Obama goes with all the time, not Joe, I haven’t heard Joe use the term because I’m not sure he knows what it represents or means, but I have heard Obama use it. And we have the best carbon emission numbers that we’ve had in 35 years under this administration, we are working so well with industry, but here’s what we can’t do. Look at China, how filthy it is, look at Russia, look at India, it’s filthy, the air is filthy. The [Paris Accord 00:00:13:55], I took us out because we were going to have to spend trillions of dollars and we were treated very unfairly.

Donald Trump: (14:03)
When they put us in there, they did us a great disservice, they were going to take away our businesses. I will not sacrifice tens of millions of jobs, thousands and thousands of companies because of the Paris Accord, it was so unfair. China doesn’t kick in until 2030, Russia goes back to a low standard, and we kicked in right away, it would have been… It would have destroyed our businesses. So, you ready? We have done an incredible job environmentally, we have the cleanest air, the cleanest water, and the best carbon emission standards that we’ve seen in many, many years.

Moderator: (14:41)
Vice President Biden-

Donald Trump: (14:41)
And we haven’t destroyed our industries.

Moderator: (14:44)
Vice President Biden, two minutes to you uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (14:47)
Climate change, global warming is an existential threat to humanity. We have a moral obligation to deal with it. And we’re told by all the leading scientists in the world we don’t have much time, we’re going to pass the point of no return within the next 8 to 10 years. Four more years of this man eliminating all the regulations that were put in by us to clean up the climate, to clean up… To limit the emissions, will put us in a position where we’re going to be in real trouble. Here’s where we have a great opportunity. I was able to get both all the environmental organizations as well as the labor, the people worried about jobs, to support my climate plan.

Joe Biden: (15:32)
Because what it does, it will create millions of new good paying jobs, we’re going to invest in, for example, 500,000… Excuse me, 50,000 charging stations on our highways so that we can own the electric car market of the future. In the meantime, China is doing that. We’re going to be in a position where we’re going to see to it that we’re going to take 4 million existing buildings and 2 million existing homes and retrofit them so they don’t leak as much energy, saving hundreds of millions of barrels of…

Joe Biden: (16:03)
So they don’t leak as much energy saving hundreds of millions of barrels of oil in the process and creating significant number of jobs. By the way, the whole idea of what this is all going to do, it’s going to create millions of jobs and it’s going to clean the environment. Our health and our jobs are at stake. That’s what’s happening and what right now, by the way, Wall Street firms indicated that my plan, my plan will in fact, create 18.6 million jobs, 7 million more than his. This is from Wall Street and I’ll create $1 trillion more in economic growth than his proposal does. Not on climate, just on economy.

Moderator: (16:41)
President Trump, your response.

Donald Trump: (16:42)
They came out and said very strongly $6,500 will be taken away from families under his plan, that his plan is an economic disaster. If you look at what he wants to do, if you look at his plan, his-

Joe Biden: (16:56)
[crosstalk 00:16:56].

Donald Trump: (16:57)
… his environmental plan, do you know developed it? AOC plus three, they know nothing about the climate. I mean, she’s got a good line of stuff, but she knows nothing about the climate and they’re all hopping through hoops for AOC plus three. Look, their real plan cost a hundred trillion dollars. If we had the best year in the history of our country for a hundred years, we would not even come close to a number like that. When he says buildings, they want to take buildings down because they want to make bigger windows into smaller windows. As far as they’re concerned, if you had no window, it would be a lovely thing.

Donald Trump: (17:32)
This is the craziest plan that anybody has ever seen and this wasn’t done by smart people. This wasn’t done by anybody. Frankly, I don’t even know how it can be good politically. They want to spend a hundred trillion dollars. That’s their real number. He’s trying to say it was six. It’s a hundred trillion dollars. They want to knock down buildings and build new buildings with little, tiny, small windows and many other things-

Moderator: (17:57)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (17:57)
And many other things. And many other things.

Moderator: (17:58)
Okay, let me have the vice-president respond.

Donald Trump: (17:58)
It is crazy.

Moderator: (17:59)
We’re running out of time and we have a lot more questions to get back to.

Donald Trump: (18:01)
You’ll destroy our country.

Moderator: (18:02)
So let’s hear from the vice president. I have a number of more question..

Joe Biden: (18:07)
I don’t know where he comes from. I don’t know where he comes up with these numbers.

Moderator: (18:09)
Queens.

Joe Biden: (18:09)
A hundred trillion dollars, give me a break. This plan has been endorsed by every major, every major environmental group and every labor group, labor, because they know the future lies. The future lies in us being able to breathe and they know they’re good jobs and getting us there.

Joe Biden: (18:29)
By the way, the fastest growing industry in America is the electric, excuse me, solar energy and wind. He thinks wind causes cancer, windmills. It’s the fastest growing jobs and they pay good prevailing wages, 45, 50 bucks an hour. We can grow and we can be cleaner if we go the route I’m proposing.

Moderator: (18:54)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (18:55)
Excuse me.

Moderator: (18:55)
Please respond and then I have his follow up.

Donald Trump: (18:56)
We are energy independent for first time. We don’t need all of these countries that we had to fight war over because we needed their energy. We are energy independent. I know more about wind than you do. It’s extremely expensive. Kills all the birds. It’s very intermittent. It’s got a lot of problems and they happen to make the windmills in both Germany and China and the fumes coming up, if you’re a believer in carbon emission, the fumes coming up to make these massive windmills is more than anything that we’re talking about with natural gas, which is very clear.

Donald Trump: (19:29)
One other thing, solar-

Joe Biden: (19:31)
Find me a scientist who says that.

Donald Trump: (19:31)
I love solar, but solar doesn’t quite have it yet. It’s not powerful yet to really run our big, beautiful factories that we need to compete with the world.

Joe Biden: (19:42)
False.

Donald Trump: (19:42)
It’s all a pipe dream, but you know what we’ll do? We’re going to have the greatest economy in the world, but if you want to kill the economy, get rid of your oil industry you want. And what about fracking?

Moderator: (19:54)
Let me-

Donald Trump: (19:54)
Now we have to ask him about fracking.

Moderator: (19:56)
Let me allow the Vice President Biden to respond.

Joe Biden: (19:57)
I never said I oppose fracking.

Donald Trump: (20:00)
You said it on tape.

Joe Biden: (20:02)
Show the tape, put it on your website.

Donald Trump: (20:04)
I’ll put it on.

Joe Biden: (20:05)
Put it on the website. The fact of the matter is he’s flat lying.

Moderator: (20:09)
Would you rule out about banning fracking?

Joe Biden: (20:11)
I do rule out banning fracking because the answer we need, we need other industries to transition, to get to ultimately a complete zero emissions by 2025. What I will do with fracking over time is make sure that we can capture the emissions from the fracking, capture the emissions from gas. We can do that and we can do that by investing money in doing it, but it’s a transition to that.

Moderator: (20:38)
I have one more question in this pile then-

Donald Trump: (20:40)
Excuse me. He was against fracking. He said it. I will show that to you tomorrow.

Joe Biden: (20:45)
Good.

Donald Trump: (20:45)
I am against fracking. Until he got the nomination, he went to Pennsylvania. Then he said, “But you know what Pennsylvania?” He’ll be against it very soon because his party is totally against it.

Joe Biden: (20:54)
Fracking on federal land. I said, no fracking and/or oil on federal land.

Moderator: (20:59)
Let me ask this final question in this section and then I want to move on to our final section. President Trump, people of color are much more likely to live near oil refineries and chemical plants. In Texas, there are families who worry the plants near them are making them sick. Your administration has rolled back regulations on these kinds of facilities. Why should these families give you another four years in office?

Donald Trump: (21:21)
The families that we’re talking about are employed heavily and they are making a lot of money, more money than they’ve ever made. If you look at the kind of numbers that we’ve produced for Hispanic, for Black, for Asian, it’s nine times greater the percentage gain than it was under in three years than it was under eight years of the two of them to put it nicely, nine times more.

Donald Trump: (21:48)
Now somebody lives, I have not heard the numbers or the statistics that you’re saying, but they’re making a tremendous amount of money. Economically, we saved it and I saved it again a number of months ago, when oil was crashing because of the pandemic. We saved it.

Donald Trump: (22:04)
Say what you want to bet relationship. We got Saudi Arabia, Mexico and Russia to cut back, way back. We saved our oil industry and now it’s very vibrant again and everybody has very inexpensive gasoline. Remember that.

Moderator: (22:17)
Vice President Biden, your response and then we’re going to have a final question for both of you.

Joe Biden: (22:21)
My response is that those people live on what they call fence lines. He doesn’t understand this. They live near chemical plants that in fact, pollute, chemical plants and oil plants and refineries that pollute.

Joe Biden: (22:33)
I used to live near that when I was growing up in Claymont, Delaware and there are more oil refineries in Marcus Hook and the Delaware River than there is any place, including in Houston at the time. When my mom get in the car and when there are first frost to drive me to school, turning the windshield wiper, there’d been oil slick in the window. That’s why so many people in my state were dying and getting cancer. The fact is those frontline communities, it’s not a matter of what you’re paying them. It matters how you keep them safe. What do you do? You impose restrictions on the pollutions that if the pollutants coming out of those fence line communities.

Moderator: (23:07)
Okay. I have one final question called.

Donald Trump: (23:08)
Would he close down the oil industry?

Moderator: (23:10)
It falls-

Donald Trump: (23:10)
Would you close down the oil industry?

Joe Biden: (23:12)
By the way, I have a transition from the old industry, yes.

Donald Trump: (23:15)
Oh, that’s a big statement.

Joe Biden: (23:15)
I will transition. It is a big statement.

Donald Trump: (23:17)
That’s a big statement.

Joe Biden: (23:18)
Because I would stop.

Moderator: (23:19)
Why would you do that?

Joe Biden: (23:21)
Because the oil industry pollutes, significantly.

Donald Trump: (23:24)
Oh, I see. Okay.

Joe Biden: (23:24)
Here’s the deal-

Donald Trump: (23:25)
That’s a big statement.

Joe Biden: (23:26)
Well if you let me finish the statement, because it has to be replaced by renewable energy over time, over time, and I’d stopped giving to the oil industry, I’d stop giving them federal subsidies. You won’t get federal subsidies to the gas, oh, excuse me to solar and wind.

Donald Trump: (23:45)
Yeah.

Joe Biden: (23:46)
Why are we giving it to oil industry?

Donald Trump: (23:47)
We actually give it to solar and wind. That’s maybe the biggest statement. In terms of business, that’s the biggest statement.

Moderator: (23:53)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (23:53)
Because basically what he’s saying is-

Moderator: (23:55)
We have one final question, Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (23:55)
… he is going to destroy the oil industry. Will you remember that Texas? Will you remember that Pennsylvania, Oklahoma?

Moderator: (24:03)
Okay, Vice President Biden, let me give you 10 seconds.

Moderator: (24:03)
Okay.

Donald Trump: (24:03)
Remember that Pennsylvania, Oklahoma, is-

Moderator: (24:03)
Vice President Biden, let me give you 10 seconds to respond-

Donald Trump: (24:04)
Ohio.

Moderator: (24:05)
… and then I have to get to the final question. Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (24:07)
He takes everything out of context, but the point is, look, we have to move toward net zero emissions. The first place to do that by the year 2035 is in energy production, by 2050 totally.

Moderator: (24:21)
All right. One final question to both of you-

Donald Trump: (24:22)
Is he going to get China to do it?

Moderator: (24:23)
No, we’re finished with this-

Donald Trump: (24:23)
Is he going to get China to do it?

Moderator: (24:24)
We have to move onto our final question.

Joe Biden: (24:25)
No, I’m going to rejoin Paris Accord and make China abide by what they agreed to.

Donald Trump: (24:30)
[Crosstalk 00:24:31].

Moderator: (24:30)
All right. This is about leadership, gentlemen. And this first question does go to you, President Trump. Imagine this is your inauguration day. What will you say in your address, to Americans who did not vote for you? You’ll each have one minute, starting with you, Mr. Trump.

Donald Trump: (24:47)
We have to make our country totally successful, as it was prior to the plague coming in from China. Now we’re rebuilding it and we’re doing record numbers, 11.4 million jobs in a short period of time, et cetera. But, I will tell you, go back.

Donald Trump: (25:01)
Before the plague came in, just before, I was getting calls from people that were not normally people that would call me. They wanted to get together. We had the best Black unemployment numbers in the history of our country. Hispanic, women, Asian, people with diplomas, with no diplomas, MIT graduates; number one in the class, everybody had the best numbers. And you know what? The other side wanted to get together. They wanted to unify.

Donald Trump: (25:28)
Success is going to bring us together. We are on the road to success. But I’m cutting taxes, and he wants to raise everybody’s taxes and he wants to put new regulations on everything. He will kill it. If he gets in, you will have a Depression, the likes of which you’ve never seen. Your 401(k)s will go to hell, and it’ll be a very, very sad day for this country.

Moderator: (25:49)
All right. Vice President Biden, same question to you: what will you say during your inaugural address to Americans who did not vote for you?

Joe Biden: (25:57)
I will say, I’m an American President. I represent all of you, whether you voted for me or against me, and I’m going to make sure that you’re represented. I’m going to give you hope. We’re going to move; we’re going to choose science over fiction. We’re going to choose hope over fear. We’re going to choose to move forward because we have enormous opportunities, enormous opportunities to make things better.

Joe Biden: (26:19)
We can grow this economy, we can deal with the systemic racism. At the same time, we can make sure that our economy is being run and moved and motivated by clean energy, creating millions of new jobs. That’s the fact, that’s what we’re going to do. And I’m going to say, as I said at the beginning, what is on the ballot here is the character of this country. Decency, honor, respect. Treating people with dignity, making sure that everyone has an even chance. And I’m going to make sure you get that. You haven’t been getting it the last four years.

Moderator: (26:53)
All right, I want to thank you both for a very robust hour and a half, a fantastic debate. Really appreciate it. President Trump, Former Joe Biden. Thank you to Belmont University for hosting us tonight, and most importantly, thank you to those watching tonight. Election day is November 3rd. Don’t forget to vote. Thank you everyone and have a great night.

Joe Biden: (27:16)
Thank you.
Moderator: (01:20)
Good evening from the Health Education Campus of Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic. I’m Moderator of Fox News and I welcome you to the first of the 2020 Presidential Debates between Donald Trump and former Joe Biden. This debate is sponsored by the Commission on Presidential debates. The Commission has designed the format, six roughly 15 minute segments with two minute answers from each candidate to the first question, then open discussion for the rest of each segment. Both campaigns have agreed to these rules. For the record, I decided the topics and the questions in each topic. I can assure you none of the questions has been shared with the Commission or the two candidates.

Moderator: (02:10)
This debate is being conducted under health and safety protocols designed by the Cleveland Clinic, which is serving as the Health Security advisor to the Commission for all four debates. As a precaution, both campaigns have agreed the candidates will not shake hands at the beginning of tonight’s debate. The audience here in the hall has promised to remain silent. No cheers, no boos, or other interruptions so we, and more importantly you, can focus on what the candidates have to say. No noise except right now, as we welcome the Republican nominee, President Trump, and the Democratic nominee Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (02:49)
How you doing, man?

Donald Trump: (02:51)
How are you doing?

Joe Biden: (02:51)
I’m well.

Moderator: (03:11)
Gentlemen, a lot of people been waiting for this night, so let’s get going. Our first subject is the Supreme Court. President Trump, you nominated Amy Coney Barrett over the weekend to succeed the late Ruth Bader Ginsburg on the Court. You say the Constitution is clear about your obligation and the Senate’s to consider a nominee to the Court. Vice President Biden, you say that this is an effort by the President and Republicans to jam through on an appointment in what you call an abuse of power. My first question to both of you tonight, why are you right in the argument you make and your opponent wrong? And where do you think a Justice Barrett would take the court? President Trump, in this first segment, you go first. Two minutes.

Donald Trump: (04:01)
Thank you very much, Chris. I will tell you very simply. We won the election. Elections have consequences. We have the Senate, we have the White House, and we have a phenomenal nominee respected by all. Top, top academic, good in every way. Good in every way. In fact, some of her biggest endorsers are very liberal people from Notre Dame and other places. So I think she’s going to be fantastic. We have plenty of time. Even if we did it after the election itself. I have a lot of time after the election, as you know. So I think that she will be outstanding. She’s going to be as good as anybody that has served on that court. We really feel that. We have a professor at Notre Dame, highly respected by all, said she’s the single greatest student he’s ever had. He’s been a professor for a long time at a great school.

Donald Trump: (04:53)
And we won the election and therefore we have the right to choose her, and very few people knowingly would say otherwise. And by the way, the Democrats, they wouldn’t even think about not doing it. The only difference is they’d try and do it faster. There’s no way they would give it up. They had Merrick Garland, but the problem is they didn’t have the election so they were stopped. And probably that would happen in reverse, also. Definitely would happen in reverse. So we won the election and we have the right to do it, Chris.

Moderator: (05:22)
President Trump, thank you. Same question to you, Vice President Biden. You have two minutes.

Joe Biden: (05:29)
Well, first of all, thank you for doing this and looking forward to this, Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (05:34)
Thank you, Joe.

Joe Biden: (05:36)
The American people have a right to have a say in who the Supreme Court nominee is and that say occurs when they vote for United States Senators and when they vote for the President of United States. They’re not going to get that chance now because we’re in the middle of an election already. The election has already started. Tens of thousands of people already voted and so the thing that should happen is we should wait. We should wait and see what the outcome of this election is because that’s the only way the American people get to express their view is by who they elect as President and who they elect as Vice President.

Joe Biden: (06:12)
Now, what’s at stake here is the President’s made it clear, he wants to get rid of the Affordable Care Act. He’s been running on that, he ran on that and he’s been governing on that. He’s in the Supreme Court right now trying to get rid of the Affordable Care Act, which will strip 20 million people from having health insurance now, if it goes into court. And the justice, I’m not opposed to the justice, she seems like a very fine person. But she’s written, before she went in the bench, which is her right, that she thinks that the Affordable Care Act is not Constitutional. The other thing that’s on the court, and if it’s struck down, what happens? Women’s rights are fundamentally changed. Once again, a woman could pay more money because she has a pre-existing condition of pregnancy. They’re able to charge women more for the same exact procedure a man gets.

Joe Biden: (07:08)
And that ended when we, in fact, passed the Affordable Care Act, and there’s a hundred million people who have pre-existing conditions and they’ll be taken away as well. Those pre-existing conditions, insurance companies are going to love this. And so it’s just not appropriate to do this before this election. If he wins the election and the Senate is Republican, then he goes forward. If not, we should wait until February.

Donald Trump: (07:34)
There aren’t a hundred million people with pre-existing conditions. As far as a say is concerned, the people already had their say. Okay, Justice Ginsburg said very powerfully, very strongly, at some point 10 years ago or so, she said a President and the Senate is elected for a period of time, but a President is elected for four years. We’re not elected for three years. I’m not elected for three years. So we have the Senate, we have a President-

Joe Biden: (08:01)
He’s elected to the next election.

Donald Trump: (08:02)
During that period of time, during that period of time, we have an opening. I’m not elected for three years. I’m elected for four years. Joe, the hundred million people is totally wrong. I don’t know where you got that number. The bigger problem that you have is that you’re going to extinguish 180 million people with their private health care, that they’re very happy this.

Joe Biden: (08:24)
That’s simply not true.

Donald Trump: (08:25)
Well, you’re certainly going to socialist. You’re going to socialist medicine-

Moderator: (08:29)
Gentlemen, we’re now into open discussion.

Joe Biden: (08:31)
Open discussion.

Moderator: (08:32)
Open discussion, yes, I agree. Go ahead, Vice President.

Joe Biden: (08:33)
Number one, he knows what I proposed. What I proposed is that we expand Obamacare and we increase it. We do not wipe any. And one of the big debates we had with 23 of my colleagues trying to win the nomination that I won, were saying that Biden wanted to allow people to have private insurance still. They can. They do. They will under my proposal.

Donald Trump: (08:58)
That’s not what you’ve said and it’s not what your party is saying.

Joe Biden: (09:00)
That is simply a lie.

Donald Trump: (09:02)
Your party doesn’t say it. Your party wants to go socialist medicine and socialist healthcare.

Joe Biden: (09:05)
The party is me. Right now, I am the Democratic Party.

Donald Trump: (09:08)
And they’re going to dominate you, Joe. You know that.

Joe Biden: (09:09)
I am the Democratic Party right now.

Donald Trump: (09:11)
Not according to Harris.

Joe Biden: (09:12)
The platform of the Democratic Party is what I, in fact, approved of, what I approved of. Now, here’s the deal. The deal is that it’s going to wipe out pre-existing conditions. And, by the way, the 20, the 200 mil- the 200,000 people that have died on his watch, how many of those have survived? Well, there’s seven million people that contracted COVID. What does it mean for them going forward if you strike down the Affordable Care Act?

Donald Trump: (09:39)
Joe, you’ve had 308,000 military people dying because you couldn’t provide them proper healthcare in the military. So don’t tell me about this.

Joe Biden: (09:47)
I’m happy to talk about this.

Donald Trump: (09:48)
And if you were here, it wouldn’t be 200, it would be two million people because you were very late on the draw. You didn’t want me to ban China, which was heavily infected. You didn’t want me to ban Europe.

Moderator: (09:58)
All right, gentlemen, Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (10:00)
You would have been much later, Joe, much later.

Moderator: (10:04)
Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (10:04)
We’re talking about two million people.

Joe Biden: (10:05)
You’re not going to be able to shut him up.

Moderator: (10:06)
Mr. President, as the moderator, we are going to talk about COVID in the next segment. But go ahead.

Joe Biden: (10:11)
Let me finish. The point is that the President also is opposed to Roe V. Wade. That’s on the ballot as well and the court, in the court, and so that’s also at stake right now. And so the election is all-

Donald Trump: (10:25)
You don’t know what’s on the ballot. Why is it on the ballot? Why is it on the ballot? It’s not on the ballot.

Joe Biden: (10:31)
It’s on the ballot in the court.

Donald Trump: (10:32)
I don’t think so.

Joe Biden: (10:33)
In the court.

Donald Trump: (10:34)
There’s nothing happening there.

Joe Biden: (10:35)
Donald would you just be quiet for a minute.

Donald Trump: (10:36)
You don’t know her view on Roe V. Wade? You don’t know here view.

Moderator: (10:40)
Well, all right. All right. Let’s talk. We’ve got a lot to unpack here, gentlemen. We’ve got a lot of time. On healthcare, and then we’ll come back to Roe V. Wade.

Joe Biden: (10:51)
All right.

Moderator: (10:51)
Mr. President, the Supreme Court will hear a case a week after the election in which the Trump Administration, along with 18 state Attorney Generals are seeking to overturn Obamacare, to end Obamacare.

Donald Trump: (11:05)
That’s right.

Moderator: (11:05)
You have spent the last week-

Donald Trump: (11:07)
Because they want to give good healthcare.

Moderator: (11:08)
If I may ask my question, sir.

Joe Biden: (11:11)
Good healthcare.

Moderator: (11:11)
Over the last four years, you have promised to repeal and replace Obamacare, but you have never in these four years come up with a plan, a comprehensive plan, to replace Obamacare.

Donald Trump: (11:25)
Yes, I have. Of course, I have. The individual mandate.

Moderator: (11:26)
[crosstalk 00:11:26] when I finish I’m going to give an opportunity-

Donald Trump: (11:28)
Excuse me. I got rid of the individual mandate, which was a big chunk of Obamacare.

Moderator: (11:31)
That’s not a comprehensive place.

Donald Trump: (11:32)
That is absolutely a big thing. That was the worst part of Obamacare.

Moderator: (11:35)
I didn’t ask, sir.

Donald Trump: (11:36)
Chris, that was the worst part of Obamacare.

Moderator: (11:38)
You’re debating him not me. Let me ask my question.

Donald Trump: (11:38)
Well, I’ll ask Joe. The individual mandate was the most unpopular aspect of Obamacare.

Moderator: (11:44)
Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (11:44)
I got rid of it. And we will protect people.

Moderator: (11:46)
Mr. President, I’m the moderator of this debate and I would like you to let me ask my question and then you can answer.

Donald Trump: (11:52)
Go ahead.

Moderator: (11:53)
You, in the course of these four years, have never come up with a comprehensive plan to replace Obamacare, and just this last Thursday you signed a largely symbolic Executive Order to protect people with pre-existing conditions five days before this debate. So my question, sir, is what is the Trump healthcare plan?

Donald Trump: (12:16)
Well, first of all, I guess I’m debating you, not him, but that’s okay. I’m not surprised. Let me just tell you something. There’s nothing symbolic. I’m cutting drug prices. I’m going with Favored Nations, which no President has the courage to do because you’re going against big pharma. Drug prices will be coming down 80 or 90%. You could have done it during your 47 year period in government, but you didn’t do it. Nobody’s done it. So we’re cutting healthcare.

Moderator: (12:40)
What about pre-existing conditions?

Donald Trump: (12:40)
All of the things that we’ve done.

Joe Biden: (12:41)
He has not done healthcare.

Donald Trump: (12:42)
I’ll give you an example. Insulin, it was destroying families, destroying people, the cost. I’m getting it for so cheap it’s like water, you want to know the truth. So cheap. Take a look at all of the drugs that what we’re doing. Prescription drug prices, we’re going to allow our Governors now to go to other countries to buy drugs because when they paid just a tiny fraction of what we do.

Moderator: (13:03)
Okay, like I say, this is open discussion.

Donald Trump: (13:04)
This is big stuff.

Moderator: (13:06)
Sir, you’ll be happy. I’m about to pick up on one of your points to ask the Vice President, which is, he points out that you would like to add a public option to Obamacare.

Joe Biden: (13:17)
Yes.

Moderator: (13:17)
And the argument that he makes and other Republicans make is that that is going to end private insurance.

Joe Biden: (13:23)
It is not.

Moderator: (13:25)
If I start asking the question.

Donald Trump: (13:26)
That’s not what your party says, by the way.

Moderator: (13:29)
And it will end private insurance and create a government takeover of health.

Joe Biden: (13:32)
It does not. It’s only for those people who are so poor they qualify for Medicaid they can get that free in most States, except Governors who want to deny people who are poor Medicaid. Anyone who qualifies for Medicare, excuse me, Medicaid would automatically be enrolled in the public option. The vast majority of the American people would still not be in that option. Number one. Number two.

Donald Trump: (13:57)
Joe, you agreed with Bernie Sanders, who’s far left, on the manifesto, we call it. And that gives you socialized medicine.

Joe Biden: (14:04)
Look, hey.

Donald Trump: (14:05)
Are you saying you didn’t agree?

Joe Biden: (14:06)
I’m not going to listen to him. The fact of the matter is I beat Bernie Sanders.

Donald Trump: (14:10)
Not by much.

Joe Biden: (14:10)
I beat him by a whole hell of a lot.

Donald Trump: (14:12)
Not by much.

Joe Biden: (14:12)
I’m here standing facing you, old buddy.

Donald Trump: (14:14)
If Pocahontas would have left two days early you would have lost every primary.

Joe Biden: (14:17)
All he knows how to do-

Donald Trump: (14:18)
On Super Tuesday, you got very lucky.

Joe Biden: (14:21)
Look he’s the deal. I got very lucky. I’m going to get very lucky tonight as well.

Donald Trump: (14:23)
With what?

Joe Biden: (14:23)
And tonight I’m going to make sure.

Donald Trump: (14:25)
With what?

Joe Biden: (14:25)
Because here’s the deal, here’s the deal. The fact is that everything he’s saying so far is simply a lie. I’m not here to call out his lies. Everybody knows he’s a liar.

Donald Trump: (14:34)
But you agree. Joe, you’re the liar. You graduated last in your class not first in your class.

Joe Biden: (14:41)
God, I want to make sure-

Moderator: (14:43)
Mr. President, can you let him finish, sir?

Joe Biden: (14:44)
No, he doesn’t know how to do that.

Donald Trump: (14:46)
You’d be surprised. You’d be surprised. Go ahead, Joe.

Joe Biden: (14:47)
The wrong guy, the wrong night, at the wrong time.

Donald Trump: (14:51)
Listen, you agreed with Bernie Sanders and the manifesto.

Joe Biden: (14:55)
There is no manifesto, number one.

Moderator: (14:57)
Please let him speak, Mr. President.

Joe Biden: (14:58)
Number two.

Donald Trump: (14:58)
He just lost the left.

Joe Biden: (14:59)
Number two.

Donald Trump: (15:01)
You just lost the left. You agreed with Bernie Sanders on a plan that you absolutely agreed to and under that plan [crosstalk 00:15:10], they call it socialized medicine.

Moderator: (15:13)
Mr. President.

Joe Biden: (15:14)
I’ll tell you what, he is not for any help for people needing healthcare.

Donald Trump: (15:20)
Who is, Bernie?

Joe Biden: (15:21)
Because he, in fact, already has costs 10 million people their healthcare that they had from their employers because of his recession. Number one. Number two, there are 20 million people getting healthcare through Obamacare now that he wants to take it away. He won’t ever look you in the eye and say that’s what he wants to do. Take it away.

Donald Trump: (15:41)
No, I want to give them better healthcare at a much lower price, because Obamacare is no good.

Joe Biden: (15:45)
He doesn’t know how. He doesn’t know how to do that.

Donald Trump: (15:46)
I’ve already fixed it.

Joe Biden: (15:47)
He has never offered a plan.

Donald Trump: (15:49)
We’ve already fixed it to an extent. Obamacare, as you might know but probably don’t, Obamacare is no good.

Moderator: (15:54)
Gentlemen, you realize if you’re both speaking at the same time. Let the President. Go ahead, sir.

Donald Trump: (15:59)
Obamacare is no good. We made it better and I had a choice to make very early on. We took away the individual mandate. We guaranteed pre-existing conditions, but took away the individual mandate. Listen, this is the way it is. And that destroyed … They shouldn’t even call it Obamacare, then I had a choice to make, do I let my people run it really well or badly? If I run it badly, they’ll probably blame him, but they’ll blame me. But more importantly, I want to help people. Okay. I said, “You’ve got to run it so well.” And I just had a meeting with them. They said the problem is, no matter how well you run Obamacare, it’s a disaster. It’s too expensive. Premiums are too high, that it doesn’t work. So we do want to get rid of it. Chris, we want to get rid of that and give something that’s cheaper and better.

Moderator: (16:42)
I understand that, sir. But I have to give you roughly equal time.

Donald Trump: (16:45)
Go ahead.

Moderator: (16:45)
Please let the Vice President talk, sir.

Donald Trump: (16:47)
Good.

Joe Biden: (16:48)
He has no plan for healthcare.

Donald Trump: (16:50)
Of course, we do.

Moderator: (16:52)
Please.

Joe Biden: (16:52)
He sends out wishful thinking. He has Executive Orders that have no power. He hasn’t lowered drug costs for anybody. He’s been promising a healthcare plan since he got elected. He has none, like almost everything else he talks about. He does not have a plan. He doesn’t have a plan. And the fact is this man doesn’t know what he’s talking about. [crosstalk 00:17:14].

Moderator: (17:13)
All right, I have one final question for you.

Joe Biden: (17:15)
Sure.

Moderator: (17:16)
Mr. Vice President, if Senate Republicans, we were talking originally about the Supreme Court here, if Senate Republicans go ahead and confirm Justice Barrett there has been talk about ending the filibuster or even packing the court, adding to the nine justices there. You call this a distraction by the President. But, in fact, it wasn’t brought up by the President. It was brought up by some of your Democratic colleagues in the Congress. So my question to you is, you have refused in the past to talk about it, are you willing to tell the American tonight whether or not you will support either ending the filibuster or packing the court?

Joe Biden: (17:55)
Whatever position I take on that, that’ll become the issue. The issue is the American people should speak. You should go out and vote. You’re voting now. Vote and let your Senators know strongly how you feel.

Donald Trump: (18:05)
Are you going to pack the court?

Joe Biden: (18:07)
Vote now.

Donald Trump: (18:08)
Are you going to pack the court?

Joe Biden: (18:09)
Make sure you, in fact, let people know, your Senators.

Donald Trump: (18:12)
He doesn’t want to answer the question.

Joe Biden: (18:17)
I’m not going to answer the question.

Donald Trump: (18:18)
Why wouldn’t you answer that question? You want to put a lot of new Supreme Court Justices. Radical left.

Joe Biden: (18:18)
Will you shut up, man?

Donald Trump: (18:20)
Listen, who is on your list, Joe? Who’s on your list?

Moderator: (18:23)
Gentlemen, I think we’ve ended this-

Joe Biden: (18:25)
This is so un-Presidential.

Donald Trump: (18:25)
He’s going to pack the court. He is not going to give a list.

Moderator: (18:27)
We have ended the segment. We’re going to move on to the second segment.

Joe Biden: (18:30)
That was really a productive segment, wasn’t it? Keep yapping, man.

Donald Trump: (18:35)
The people understand, Joe.

Joe Biden: (18:37)
They sure do.

Donald Trump: (18:37)
47 years, you’ve done nothing. They’re understand.

Moderator: (18:40)
All right, the second subject is COVID-19, which is an awfully serious subject. So let’s try to be serious about it. We have had more than seven million cases of coronavirus in the United States and more than 200,000 people have died. Even after we produce a vaccine, experts say that it could be months or even years before we come back to anything approaching normal. My question for both of you is, based on what you have said and done so far, and what you have said you would do starting in 2021, why should the American people trust you more than your opponent to deal with this public health crisis going forward? In this case, the question goes to you first, sir. Two minutes, uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (19:33)
Good luck. 200,000 dead. As you said, over seven million infected in the United States. We, in fact, have 4% of the world’s population, 20% of the deaths. 40,000 people a day are contracting COVID. In addition to that, about between 750 and 1000 people a day are dying. When he was presented with that number, he said, “It is what it is.” Well, it is what it is because you are who you are. That’s why it is. The President has no plan. He hasn’t laid out anything. He knew all the way back in February how serious this crisis was. He knew it was a deadly disease. What did he do? He’s on tape as acknowledging he knew it. He said he didn’t tell us or give people a warning of it because he didn’t want to panic the American people. You don’t panic. He panicked. In addition to that, what did he do?

Joe Biden: (20:30)
He went in and we were insisting that the people we had in the ground in China should be able to go to Wuhan and determine for themselves how dangerous this was. He did not even ask Xi to do that.

Donald Trump: (20:43)
Wrong.

Joe Biden: (20:43)
He told us what a great job Xi was doing. He said we owe him debt of gratitude for being so transparent with us. And what did he do then? He then did nothing. He waited and waited and waited. He still doesn’t have a plan.

Donald Trump: (20:57)
Wrong.

Moderator: (20:57)
Sir, it’s his two minutes.

Donald Trump: (20:57)
It’s so wrong.

Joe Biden: (20:57)
I laid out back in March, exactly what we should be doing. And I laid out again in July, what we should be doing. We should be providing all the protective gear possible. We should be providing the money the House has passed in order to be able to go out and get people the help they need to keep their businesses open. Open schools cost a lot of money. You should get out of your bunker and get out of the sand trap in your golf course and go in the Oval Office and bring together the Democrats and Republicans and fund what needs to be done now to save lives.

Donald Trump: (21:30)
So, if we would have listened to you.

Moderator: (21:31)
Wait, wait. You have two minutes, sir.

Donald Trump: (21:31)
If we would’ve listened to you, the country would have been left wide open, millions of people would have died, not 200,000. And one person is too much. It’s China’s fault. It should have never happened. They stopped it from going in, but it was China’s fault. And, by the way, when you talk about numbers, you don’t know how many people died in China. You don’t know how many people died in Russia. You don’t know how many people died in India. They don’t exactly give you a straight count, just so you understand. But if you look at what we’ve done, I closed it and you said, “He’s xenophobic. He’s a racist and he’s xenophobic,” because you didn’t think I should have closed our country. Wait a minute.

Moderator: (22:06)
Sir, it’s his two minutes.

Donald Trump: (22:07)
You didn’t think we should have closed our country because you thought it was terrible. You wouldn’t have closed it for another two months. By my doing it early, in fact, Dr. Fauci said, “President Trump saved thousands of lives.” Many of your Democrat Governors said, “President Trump did a phenomenal job.” We worked with the Governor. Oh really, go take a look. The Governors said I did a phenomenal job. Most of them said that. In fact, people that would not be necessarily on my side said that, “President Trump did a phenomenal job.” We did. We got the gowns. We got the masks. We made the ventilators. You wouldn’t have made ventilators. And now we’re weeks away from a vaccine. We’re doing therapeutics already. Fewer people are dying when they get sick. Far fewer people are dying. We’ve done a great job.

Donald Trump: (22:54)
The only thing I haven’t done a good job, and that’s because of the fake news, no matter what you say to them, they give you a bad press on it. It’s just fake news. They give you good press, they give me bad press because that’s the way it is, unfortunately. But let me just say something. I don’t care. I’ve gotten used to it. But I’ll tell you, Joe, you could never have done the job that we did. You don’t have it in your blood. You could’ve never done that, Joe.

Joe Biden: (23:15)
I know how to do the job. I know how to get the job done.

Donald Trump: (23:18)
Well, you didn’t do very well in Swine Flu. H1-N1, you were a disaster. Your own Chief of Staff said you were a disaster.

Joe Biden: (23:25)
14,000 people died, not 200,000.

Donald Trump: (23:27)
A far less lethal disease, by the way.

Moderator: (23:32)
Sir, you made a point. Let him answer it.

Joe Biden: (23:33)
And there was no one … We didn’t shut down the economy. This is his economy he shut down. The reason it’s shut down is because, look, you folks at home. How many of you got up this morning and had an empty chair at the kitchen table because someone died of COVID? How many of you are in a situation where you lost your mom or dad and you couldn’t even speak to them, you had a nurse holding a phone up so you could in fact say goodbye?

Donald Trump: (23:57)
We would have lost far more people, far more people. You would have been months late. You’re months behind me, Joe.

Joe Biden: (24:03)
His own CDC Director says we could lose as many as another 200,000 people between now and the end of the year. And he said, if we just wear a mask, we can save half those numbers. Just a mask. And by the way, in terms of the whole notion of a vaccine, we’re for a vaccine, but I don’t trust him at all. Nor do you. I know you don’t. What we trust is a scientist.

Donald Trump: (24:25)
You don’t trust Johnson & Johnson, Pfizer?

 

Part 2
Moderator:
Okay, gentlemen, gentlemen. Let me move on to questions about the future because you both have touched on two of the questions I’m going to ask. Focusing on the future first, President Trump, you have repeatedly either contradicted or been at odds with some of your governments own top scientists. The week before last, the Head of the Centers for Disease Control, Dr. Redfield said it would be summer before the vaccine would become generally available to the public. You said that he was confused and mistaken. Those were your two words. But Dr. Slaoui, the head of your Operation Warp Speed, has said exactly the same thing. Are they both wrong?

Donald Trump: (00:15)
Well, I’ve spoken to the companies and we can have it a lot sooner. It’s a very political thing because people like this would rather make it political than save lives.

Joe Biden: (00:22)
God.

Donald Trump: (00:23)
It is a very political thing. I’ve spoken to Pfizer, I’ve spoken to all of the people that you have to speak to, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, and others. They can go faster than that by a lot. It’s become very political because the left… Or I don’t know if I call them left, I don’t know what I call them.

Moderator: (00:38)
So you’re suggesting that the head of your Operation Warp Speed, Dr. Slaoui-

Donald Trump: (00:42)
I disagree with him. No, I disagree with both of them. And he didn’t say that. He said it could be there, but it could also be much sooner. I had him in my office two days ago.

Moderator: (00:49)
He talked about the summer, sir, before it’s generally available, just like Dr. Redfield.

Donald Trump: (00:53)
Because he said it’s a possibility that we’ll have the answer before November 1st. It could also be after that.

Moderator: (00:59)
I’m talking about when it’s generally available, not-

Donald Trump: (01:00)
Well, we’re going to deliver it right away. We have the military all set up. Logistically, they’re all set up. We have our military that delivers soldiers and they can do 200,000 a day. They’re going to be delivering-

Joe Biden: (01:11)
This is the same man who told you-

Donald Trump: (01:13)
It’s all set up.

Joe Biden: (01:14)
… by Easter, this would be gone away. By the warm weather, it’d be gone. Miraculous, like a miracle. And by the way, maybe you could inject some bleach in your arm, and that would take care of it. This is the same man.

Donald Trump: (01:24)
That was said sarcastically, and you know that. That was said sarcastically.

Joe Biden: (01:28)
So here’s the deal. This man is talking about a vaccine. Every serious company is talking about maybe having a vaccine done by the end of the year, but the distribution of that vaccine will not occur until sometime beginning of the middle of next year to get it out, if we get the vaccine. And pray God we will. Pray God we will.

Moderator: (01:49)
Mr. Vice President, I want to pick up-

Donald Trump: (01:50)
You’ll have the vaccine sooner than that.

Moderator: (01:51)
I want to pick up on this question though. You say the public can trust the scientists, but they can’t trust President Trump. In fact, you said that again tonight. Your running mate, Senator Harris, goes further, saying that public health experts quote, “Will be muzzled, will be suppressed.” Given the fact that polls already show that people are concerned about the vaccine and are reluctant to take it, are you and your running mate, Senator Harris, contributing to that fear?

Joe Biden: (02:18)
No more than the question you just asked him. You pointed out he puts pressure and disagrees with his own scientists.

Moderator: (02:25)
But you’re saying you can’t-

Joe Biden: (02:26)
Everybody knows-

Moderator: (02:26)
Or Senator Harris is saying you can’t trust the scientist.

Joe Biden: (02:28)
Well, no, no. You can trust the scientist. She didn’t say that. You can trust the-

Moderator: (02:32)
She said that public health experts quote, “Will be muzzled, will be suppressed.”

Joe Biden: (02:36)
Yes. Well, that’s what he’s going to try to do, but there’s thousands of scientists out there, like here at this great hospital that don’t work for him. Their job doesn’t depend on him. They’re the people… And by the way-

Donald Trump: (02:51)
We spoke to the scientists that are in charge-

Joe Biden: (02:53)
By the way-

Donald Trump: (02:53)
… they will have the vaccine very soon.

Moderator: (02:55)
Let him finish.

Joe Biden: (02:55)
Do you believe for a moment what he’s telling you in light of all the lies he’s told you about the whole issue relating to COVID? He still hasn’t even acknowledged that he knew this was happening, knew how dangerous it was going to be back in February, and he didn’t even tell you. He’s on record as saying it. He panicked or he just looked at the stock market. One of the two. Because guess what? A lot of people died and a lot more are going to die unless he gets a lot smarter, a lot quicker-

Moderator: (03:27)
Mr. President?

Donald Trump: (03:28)
Did you use the word smart? So you said you went to Delaware State, but you forgot the name of your college. You didn’t go to Delaware State. You graduated either the lowest or almost the lowest in your class. Don’t ever use the word smart with me. Don’t ever use that word.

Joe Biden: (03:44)
Oh, give me a break.

Donald Trump: (03:44)
Because you know what? There’s nothing smart about you, Joe. 47 years you’ve done nothing.

Joe Biden: (03:49)
Well, let’s have this debate-

Donald Trump: (03:51)
Let me just tell you something, Joe. If you would have had the charge of what I was put through, I had to close the greatest economy of the history of our country. And by the way, now it’s being built again and it’s going up fast.

Moderator: (04:02)
We’ll get to the economy in the next segment, sir.

Donald Trump: (04:04)
Okay. It’s going up fast. I look forward to talking about it.

Moderator: (04:06)
Okay. When it comes to how the virus has been handled so far, the two of you have taken very different approaches, and this is going to affect how the virus is handled going forward by whichever of you ends up becoming the next president. I want to quickly go through several of those. Reopenings. Vice President Biden, you have been much more reluctant than President Trump about reopening the economy and schools. Why, sir?

Joe Biden: (04:31)
Because he doesn’t have a plan. If I were running it, I’d know what the plan is. You’ve got to provide these businesses the ability to have the money to be able to reopen with the PPE, as well as with the sanitation they need. You have to provide them classic-

Donald Trump: (04:45)
Tell that to Nancy Pelosi.

Joe Biden: (04:47)
Will he just shush for a minute?

Donald Trump: (04:49)
Tell that to Nancy Pelosi, and Schumer [crosstalk 00:04:52] Chuck.

Joe Biden: (04:52)
Nancy Pelosi and Schumer, they have a plan. He won’t even meet with them. The Republicans won’t meet in the Senate. He sits in his golf course. Well, I mean, literally, think about it. Think about it.

Donald Trump: (05:04)
You probably play more than I do, Joe.

Moderator: (05:06)
What about this question of reopenings and the fact-

Donald Trump: (05:08)
Well, he wants to shut down this country and I want to keep it open, and we did a great thing by shutting it down-

Joe Biden: (05:15)
You just admitted you’d shut it down.

Donald Trump: (05:15)
Wait a minute, Joe. Let me shut you down for a second, Joe, just for one second. He wants to shut down the country. We just went through it. We had to, because we didn’t know anything about the disease. Now we’ve found that elderly people with heart problems and diabetes and different problems are very, very vulnerable. We learned a lot. Young children aren’t, even younger people aren’t. We’ve learned a lot, but he wants to shut it down. More people will be hurt by continuing. If you look at Pennsylvania, if you look at certain states that have been shut down, they have Democrat governors, all, one of the reasons they shut down is because they want to keep it shut down until after the election on November 3rd.

Moderator: (05:54)
All right. I want to move onto another-

Donald Trump: (05:55)
Because it’s a political thing.

Moderator: (05:55)
I want to move onto another subject.

Joe Biden: (05:55)
I got to respond to that.

Moderator: (05:55)
I want to move-

Donald Trump: (05:57)
But those states-

Moderator: (05:58)
Gentlemen, I want to move onto another subject.

Donald Trump: (06:00)
Those states are not doing well that are shut down right now.

Joe Biden: (06:02)
I got to respond to that.

Donald Trump: (06:04)
He wants to shut down the whole country.

Moderator: (06:04)
President Trump, you have begun to increasingly question the effectiveness of masks as a disease preventer. And in fact, recently you have cited the issue of waiters touching their masks and touching plates. Are you questioning the efficacy of masks?

Donald Trump: (06:20)
No, I think masks are okay. You have to understand, if you look… I mean, I have a mask right here. I put a mask on when I think I need it. Tonight, as an example, everybody’s had a test and you’ve had social distancing and all of the things that you have to, but I wear masks-

Joe Biden: (06:33)
Just like your rally.

Donald Trump: (06:33)
… when needed. When needed, I wear masks.

Moderator: (06:35)
Okay. Let me ask-

Donald Trump: (06:36)
I don’t wear a mask like him. Every time you see him, he’s got a mask. He could be speaking 200 feet away from him and he shows up with the biggest mask I’ve ever seen. I will say this-

Moderator: (06:45)
Vice President Biden, go ahead, sir.

Joe Biden: (06:48)
Look, the way to open businesses is give them the wherewithal to be able open. We provided money, the-

Moderator: (06:55)
But I was asking you, sir, about masks.

Joe Biden: (06:56)
Well, masks make a big difference. His own head of the CDC said if we just wore masks between now, if everybody wore a mask and social distanced between now and January, we’d probably save up to 100,000 lives. It matters. It matters.

Donald Trump: (07:10)
And they’ve also said the opposite. They’ve also said-

Joe Biden: (07:12)
No serious person has said the opposite. No serious person.

Moderator: (07:14)
Okay. I want to ask you-

Donald Trump: (07:17)
Dr. Fauci. Dr. Fauci said the opposite.

Joe Biden: (07:18)
He did not say the opposite.

Moderator: (07:19)
I want to ask you, we’ve got a little than a minute left in this segment.

Donald Trump: (07:22)
He said very strongly, “Masks are not good.” Then he changed his mind. He said, “Masks are good.”

Moderator: (07:25)
I want to ask-

Donald Trump: (07:25)
I’m okay with masks. I’m not fighting masks.

Moderator: (07:27)
I want to ask you both about one last subject because your different approaches has even affected the way that you have campaigned. President Trump, you’re holding large rallies with crowds packed together, thousands of people.

Donald Trump: (07:38)
Outside.

Moderator: (07:39)
Outside. Yes, sir. Agreed. Vice President Biden, you are holding much smaller events with-

Donald Trump: (07:46)
Because nobody will show up.

Moderator: (07:47)
… people with masks.

Donald Trump: (07:47)
Well, it’s true. Nobody shows up to his rallies.

Moderator: (07:50)
All right. In any case, why you holding the big rallies? Why you not? You go first, sir.

Donald Trump: (07:56)
Because people want to hear what I have to say. I mean-

Moderator: (07:59)
But are not worried about us spreading disease?

Donald Trump: (08:01)
… I’m doing my job as a president, and I’ll have 25, 35,000 people show up at airports. We use airports and hangers and we have a lot of people-

Moderator: (08:06)
Are you not worried about the disease issues, sir?

Donald Trump: (08:08)
Well, so far we have had no problem whatsoever. It’s outside. That’s a big difference according to the experts. We do them outside, we have tremendous crowds, as you see, and literally on 24 hours notice. And Joe does the circles and has three people someplace.

Joe Biden: (08:26)
By the way, did you see one of the last big rallies he had? A reporter came up to him to ask him a question, he said, “No, no, no. Stand back, put on your mask, put on a mask. Have you been tested? I’m way far away from those other people.” That’s what he said, “I’m going to be okay.” He’s not worried about you. He’s not worried about the people out there [crosstalk 00:08:48].

Donald Trump: (08:48)
We’ve had no negative effect.

Joe Biden: (08:49)
No negative effect. Come on.

Donald Trump: (08:51)
We’ve had no negative effect, and we’ve had 35, 40,000 people at these rallies.

Moderator: (08:55)
All right. Do you want to just quickly finish up? Because I want to move on to our next-

Joe Biden: (08:57)
Yes, I would. He’s been totally irresponsible the way in which he has handled the social distancing and people wearing masks, basically encouraged them not to. He’s a fool on this.

Donald Trump: (09:08)
If you could get the crowds, you would have done the same thing. But you can’t. Nobody cares.

Moderator: (09:12)
Gentlemen, can we move on to the-

Donald Trump: (09:13)
No cares.

Moderator: (09:13)
Gentlemen, can we move on to the economy?

Donald Trump: (09:15)
Yes.

Moderator: (09:15)
The economy is, I think it’s fair to say, recovering faster than expected from the shutdown-

Donald Trump: (09:22)
Much faster.

Moderator: (09:22)
… in the second quarter. The unemployment rate fell to 8.4% last month. The Federal Reserve says the hit to growth, which is going to be there, is not going to be nearly as big as they had expected. President Trump, you say we are in a V-shaped recovery. Vice President Biden, you say it’s more of a K-shape. What difference does that mean to the American people in terms of the economy? President Trump, in this segment you go first.

Donald Trump: (09:52)
So we built the greatest economy in history. We closed it down because of the China plague. When the plague came in, we closed it down, which was very hard psychologically to do. He didn’t think we should close it down and he was wrong. Again, two million people would be dead now instead of… Still, 204,000 people is too much. One person is too much. Should have never happened from China. But what happened is we closed it down and now we’re reopening and we’re doing record business. We had 10.4 million people in a four month period that we’ve put back into the workforce. That’s a record the likes of which nobody’s ever seen before. And he wants to close down the… He will shut it down again. He will destroy this country.

Donald Trump: (10:31)
A lot of people, between drugs and alcohol and depression, when you start shutting it down, you take a look at what’s happening at some of your Democrat-run states where they have these tough shutdowns. And I’m telling you it’s because they don’t want to open it. One of them came out last week, you saw that, “Oh, we’re going to open up on November 9th.” Why November 9th? Because it’s after the election. They think they’re hurting us by keeping them closed. They’re hurting people. People know what to do. They can social distance. They can wash their hands, they can wear masks. They can do whatever they want, but they got to open these states up.

Donald Trump: (11:04)
When you look at North Carolina, when you look, and these governors are under siege, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and a couple of others, you got to open these states up. It’s not fair. You’re talking about almost it’s like being in prison. And you look at what’s going on with divorce, look at what’s going on with alcoholism and drugs. It’s a very, very sad thing. And he’ll close down the whole country. This guy will close down the whole country and destroy our country. Our country is coming back incredibly well, setting records as it does it. We don’t need somebody to come in and say, “Let’s shut it down.”

Moderator: (11:36)
All right. Your two minutes, sir. We’re now moved to you. As I said, posing the question, the president says it’s a V-shape recovery, you say it’s a K-shaped recovery. What’s the difference?

Joe Biden: (11:48)
The difference is millionaires and billionaires like him in the middle of the COVID crisis have done very well. Billionaires have made another $300 billion because of his profligate tax proposal, and he only focused on the market. But you folks at home, you folks living in Scranton and Claymont and all the small towns and working class towns in America, how well are you doing? This guy paid a total of $750 in taxes.

Donald Trump: (12:17)
That’s wrong.

Moderator: (12:18)
Sir, wait. No. Sir-

Donald Trump: (12:18)
[crosstalk 00:12:19].

Moderator: (12:20)
Yeah, I understand. You’ve agreed to the two minutes, so please let him have it.

Joe Biden: (12:23)
Do I get my time back? The fact is that he has in fact, worked on this in a way that he’s going to be the first president of the United States to leave office, having fewer jobs in his administration than when he became president. Fewer jobs than when he became president. First one in American history.

Joe Biden: (12:40)
Secondly, the people who have lost their jobs are those people who have been on the front lines. Those people who have been saving our lives, those people who have been out there dying. People who’ve been putting themselves in the way to make sure that we could all try to make it. And the idea that he is insisting that we go forward and open when you have almost half the states in America with a significant increase in COVID deaths and COVID cases in the United States of America, and he wants to open it up more. Why is he want to open it up? Why does he take care of the… You can’t fix the economy until you fix the COVID crisis. And he has no intention of doing anything about making it better for you all at home in terms of your health and your safety.

Joe Biden: (13:25)
Schools. Why aren’t schools open? Because it costs a lot of money to open them safely. They were going to give, his administration going to give the teachers and school students masks, and then they decided no, couldn’t do that because it’s not a national emergency. Not a national emergency. They’ve done nothing to help small businesses. Nothing. They’re closing. One in six is now gone. He ought to get on the job and take care of the needs of the American people so we can open safely.

Moderator: (13:54)
All right. Your time is up, sir. We are going to get to-

Donald Trump: (13:56)
I have to respond to that.

Moderator: (13:57)
Well, you both had two minutes, sir.

Donald Trump: (13:59)
Excuse me, he made a statement.

Moderator: (14:01)
And so did you.

Donald Trump: (14:03)
No, people want their schools open. They don’t want to be shut down. They don’t want their state shut down. They want their restaurants. I look at New York. It’s so sad what’s happening in New York. It’s almost like a ghost town, and I’m not sure it can ever recover what they’ve done to New York. People want their places open. They want to get back to their lives.

Joe Biden: (14:19)
People want to be safe.

Donald Trump: (14:20)
They’ll be careful, but they want their schools open.

Joe Biden: (14:22)
People want to be safe.

Donald Trump: (14:23)
I’m the one that brought back football. By the way, I brought back Big Ten football. It was me and I’m very happy to do it-

Moderator: (14:30)
All right. Let’s-

Donald Trump: (14:31)
… and people of Ohio are very proud of me. And you know how I found out? When [crosstalk 00:14:35].

Moderator: (14:36)
Gentlemen, we’re going to get to your economic plans going forward in a moment, but first, Mr. President, as you well know, there’s a new report that in 2016, the year you were elected president, and 2017, your first year as president, that you paid $750 a year in federal income tax each of those years. I know that you pay a lot of other taxes, but I’m asking you this specific question. Is it true that you paid $750 in federal income taxes each of those two years?

Donald Trump: (15:08)
I paid millions of dollars in taxes, millions of dollars of income tax. And let me just tell you, there was a story in one of the papers that paid-

Joe Biden: (15:16)
Show us your tax returns.

Donald Trump: (15:17)
I paid $38 million one year, I paid $27 million one year.

Joe Biden: (15:24)
Show us your tax returns.

Donald Trump: (15:24)
You’ll see it as soon as it’s finished, you’ll see it. You know, if you wanted to, go to the Board of Elections. There’s 118 page or so report that says everything I have, every bank I have, I’m totally under leveraged because the assets are extremely good, and I built a great company.

Moderator: (15:42)
Sir, I’m asking you a specific question, which is-

Donald Trump: (15:43)
But let me tell you-

Moderator: (15:43)
I understand all of that.

Joe Biden: (15:44)
Release your tax return.

Moderator: (15:45)
I understand all of that-

Donald Trump: (15:45)
Let me-

Moderator: (15:47)
No, Mr. President, I’m asking you a question. Will you tell us how much you paid in federal income taxes in 2016 and 2017?

Donald Trump: (15:56)
Millions of dollars.

Moderator: (15:58)
You paid millions of dollars in-

Donald Trump: (15:59)
Millions of dollars, yes.

Moderator: (15:59)
So not 750?

Donald Trump: (16:00)
Millions of dollars. And you’ll get to see it. And you’ll get to see it.

Joe Biden: (16:03)
When? Inshallah?

Donald Trump: (16:04)
But let me just tell you-

Joe Biden: (16:05)
In [crosstalk 00:16:04]?

Donald Trump: (16:05)
Chris, let me just say something, that it was the tax laws. I don’t want to pay tax. Before I came here, I was a private developer, I was a private business people. Like every other private person, unless they’re stupid, they go through the laws, and that’s what it is. He passed a tax bill that gave us all these privileges for depreciation and for tax credits. We build the building and we get tax credits, like the hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue. Which by the way, was given to me by the Obama administration, if you can believe that. Now the man got fired right after that happened, but that’s-

Moderator: (16:40)
Vice President Biden, you want to respond?

Joe Biden: (16:42)
Yeah, I do want to respond. Look, the tax code that put him in a position that he pays less tax than on the money a school teacher makes is because of him… He says he’s smart because he can take advantage of the tax code. And he does take advantage of the tax code. That’s why I’m going to eliminate the Trump tax cuts. And I’m going to eliminate those tax cuts.

Donald Trump: (17:06)
That’s okay.

Joe Biden: (17:07)
And make sure that we invest in the people who in fact need the help. People out there need help.

Donald Trump: (17:13)
But why didn’t you do it over the last 25 years?

Joe Biden: (17:16)
Because you weren’t president-

Donald Trump: (17:18)
Why didn’t you do it over the last 25 years?

Joe Biden: (17:19)
Because you weren’t president and screwing things up.

Donald Trump: (17:20)
You were a Senator and [crosstalk 00:17:21]-

Joe Biden: (17:21)
You’re the worst president America has ever had. Come on.

Donald Trump: (17:24)
Hey, Joe, let me just tell you, Joe. In 47 months, I’ve done more than you’ve done in 47 years, Joe. We’ve done things that you never even thought of doing.

Moderator: (17:33)
Okay. Gentlemen?

Donald Trump: (17:33)
Including fixing the broken military that you gave me, including taking care of your debts.

Moderator: (17:38)
Mr. President, we’re talking about the economy. I’d like to ask you about your plans going forward because Mr. Vice President, your economic plan-

Donald Trump: (17:46)
He has none.

Moderator: (17:47)
… if you were to be elected president focuses a lot on big government, big taxes, big spending. I want to focus first on the taxes. You propose more than $4 trillion over a decade in new taxes on individuals making more than $400,000 a year.

Moderator: (18:03)
… on individuals making more than $400,000 a year and on corporations. President Trump says that that kind of an increase in taxes is going to hurt the economy as it’s just coming out of a recession.

Joe Biden: (18:13)
Well, just take a look at what is the analysis done by Wall Street firms, points out that my economic plan would create 7 million more jobs than his in four years, number one. And number two, it would create an additional $1 trillion in economic growth, because it would be about buying American. The federal government spends $600 billion a year on everything from ships, to steel, to buildings and the like. And under my proposal, we’re going to make sure that every penny of that has to be made by a company-

Moderator: (18:50)
But respectfully, sir, I’m talking about taxes, not spending.

Joe Biden: (18:53)
By the way, I’m going to eliminate a significant number of the taxes. I’m going to make the corporate tax 28%. It shouldn’t be 21%. You have 91 companies federal, I mean, the fortune 500, who don’t pay a single penny in tax making billions of dollars.

Donald Trump: (19:09)
Why didn’t you do it before, when you were vice president with Obama?

Joe Biden: (19:12)
Because you in fact passed that, that was your tax proposal.

Donald Trump: (19:16)
I got it done. And you know what happened?

Joe Biden: (19:17)
Yeah, you got it done-

Donald Trump: (19:18)
Our economy boomed like it’s never boomed before.

Joe Biden: (19:20)
The economy-

Moderator: (19:20)
Mr. President-

Joe Biden: (19:22)
Let me finish.

Moderator: (19:23)
Mr. President, let me pick up on that. You would continue your free market approach, lower taxes, more deregulation, correct?

Joe Biden: (19:31)
Not lower tax for the American people.

Moderator: (19:34)
But let me-

Donald Trump: (19:34)
Excuse me.

Moderator: (19:34)
You talk about the economy booming. It turns out that in Obama’s final three years as president more jobs were created, a million and a half more jobs, than in the first three years of your presidency.

Donald Trump: (19:47)
They had the slowest economic recovery since 1929. It was the slowest recovery. Also, they took over something that was down here. All you had to do is turn on the lights and you pick up a lot. But they had the slowest economic recovery since 1929, and let me tell you about the stock market. When the stock market goes up, that means jobs. It also means 401ks. If you got in, if you ever became president with your ideas, you want to terminate my taxes. I’ll tell you what, you’ll lose. Half of the companies that have poured in here will leave. And plenty of companies that are already here, they’ll leave for other places. [crosstalk 00:20:25] They will leave and you will have a depression, the likes of which you’ve never seen.

Joe Biden: (20:29)
Look-

Moderator: (20:29)
Mr. Vice President.

Joe Biden: (20:30)
… we inherited the worst recession, short of a depression in American history. I was asked to bring it back. We were able to have an economic recovery that created the jobs you’re talking about. We handed him a booming economy, he blew it.

Donald Trump: (20:44)
It wasn’t blooming.

Joe Biden: (20:45)
He blew it.

Donald Trump: (20:46)
He was in booming. It was the weakest recovery since 1929.

Moderator: (20:50)
Wait, wait, is it fair to say he blew it when, in fact-

Donald Trump: (20:53)
When COVID came along.

Moderator: (20:54)
… when there was record low unemployment before COVID.

Joe Biden: (20:57)
Yeah, because what he did, even before COVID, manufacturing went in the hole. Manufacturing went in a hole-

Donald Trump: (21:04)
Excuse me, Chris, wait.

Joe Biden: (21:05)
… number one. Number two-

Donald Trump: (21:06)
Chris.

Joe Biden: (21:06)
Number three.

Donald Trump: (21:07)
They said it would take… No, you’re on number two.

Joe Biden: (21:09)
No.

Donald Trump: (21:10)
Chris, Chris. They said it would take-

Joe Biden: (21:12)
This guy-

Donald Trump: (21:12)
… a miracle to bring back manufacturing. I brought back 700,000 jobs. They brought back nothing. They gave up on manufacturing.

Joe Biden: (21:20)
We did not. [crosstalk 00:21:21]

Donald Trump: (21:21)
… standard fare.

Joe Biden: (21:22)
I’m the guy that brought back the automobile industry.

Donald Trump: (21:25)
He totally gave up on manufacturing.

Moderator: (21:25)
All right, let him-

Joe Biden: (21:25)
I was asked to bring back Chrysler and General Motors. He brought them back right here in the state of Ohio and Michigan. He blew it. They’re gone. He blew it. And in fact, they’re gone-

Donald Trump: (21:34)
Ohio had the best year it’s ever had last year. Michigan had the best year they’ve ever had.

Joe Biden: (21:40)
That is not true.

Donald Trump: (21:41)
Many car companies came in from Germany, from Japan, went to Michigan, went to Ohio and they didn’t come in with you. [crosstalk 00:21:47].

Moderator: (21:47)
Mr. Vice President, go ahead.

Joe Biden: (21:48)
And so you take a look at what he’s actually done. He’s done very little. His trade deals are the same way. He talks about these great trade deals. He talks about the art of the deal. China’s perfected the art of the steel. We have a higher deficit with China now than we did before. We have the highest trade deficit-

Donald Trump: (22:06)
China ate your lunch- [crosstalk 00:00:22:07].

Joe Biden: (22:08)
… with Mexico.

Donald Trump: (22:09)
China ate your lunch, Joe. And no wonder your son goes in and he takes out billions of dollars. He takes out billions of dollars to manage. He makes millions of dollars. And also, while we’re at it, why is it just out of curiosity, the mayor of Moscow’s wife gave you a son three and a half million dollars?

Joe Biden: (22:28)
That is not true.

Donald Trump: (22:28)
What did he do to deserve it? What did he do with-

Joe Biden: (22:31)
None of that is true.

Donald Trump: (22:31)
… to deserve $183,000?

Moderator: (22:31)
Sir, you’ve asked him a question, let him answer it.

Joe Biden: (22:37)
None of that is true.

Donald Trump: (22:38)
Oh really, he didn’t get three and a half million?

Moderator: (22:39)
Mr. President-

Joe Biden: (22:40)
Is totally-

Moderator: (22:41)
Mr. President, please. You’ve asked a question- [crosstalk 00:22:41]

Joe Biden: (22:41)
Totally discredited. Totally discredited. And by the way-

Donald Trump: (22:45)
Well wait, he didn’t get three and a half million dollars, Joe?

Joe Biden: (22:48)
Mr. Vice-

Donald Trump: (22:48)
He got three and a half million-

Moderator: (22:49)
Mr. President.

Donald Trump: (22:49)
… dollars.

Joe Biden: (22:50)
That is not true.

Donald Trump: (22:51)
Oh, really?

Moderator: (22:51)
Mr. President, it’s an open discussion. Please- [crosstalk 00:22:56]

Donald Trump: (22:56)
It’s a fact.

Joe Biden: (22:57)
It is not a fact.

Moderator: (22:57)
Well, you have raised an issue, let the Vice President answer.

Joe Biden: (23:00)
It’s been totally discredited.

Donald Trump: (23:01)
Did Burisma pay him 183,000 a month, with no experience in energy?

Moderator: (23:06)
Mr. President-

Joe Biden: (23:07)
My son did nothing wrong at Barisma-

Donald Trump: (23:10)
I think he did.

Moderator: (23:10)
Mr. President, let him answer. [crosstalk 00:23:13].

Joe Biden: (23:11)
He doesn’t want to let me answer, because he knows I have the truth. His position has been totally thoroughly discredited-

Donald Trump: (23:20)
By who?

Joe Biden: (23:20)
And you can-

Donald Trump: (23:20)
The media.

Joe Biden: (23:20)
by everybody. Well, by the media, by our allies.

Donald Trump: (23:23)
By the media, because they refuse to talk about it-

Joe Biden: (23:23)
By the World Bank-

Donald Trump: (23:24)
… because they’re embarrassed.

Joe Biden: (23:27)
By everyone, has discredited. And matter of fact [crosstalk 00:23:30] Matter of fact-

Moderator: (23:30)
Mr. President, please stop.

Joe Biden: (23:31)
Even the people who testified under oath-

Donald Trump: (23:33)
So let me ask you this, Joe- [crosstalk 00:23:35].

Moderator: (23:36)
Go ahead, I’m listening to you.

Joe Biden: (23:37)
Even the people under-

Donald Trump: (23:38)
He got three and a half million dollars from Moscow.

Joe Biden: (23:40)
… testified under oath in his administration said I did my job and I did it very well.

Donald Trump: (23:47)
Oh, really?

Joe Biden: (23:47)
I did it honorably.

Donald Trump: (23:47)
I’d like to know who they are.

Joe Biden: (23:48)
Well, I’ll give you the list of the people who-

Donald Trump: (23:50)
I’ll fire them.

Moderator: (23:50)
No, no. Go ahead, sir.

Joe Biden: (23:51)
I’m sure that you’ve already fired most of them, because they did a good job.

Donald Trump: (23:54)
Some people don’t do a good job.

Joe Biden: (23:55)
Well, here’s the- [crosstalk 00:23:57]

Moderator: (23:57)
Go ahead. You get the- [crosstalk 00:23:57] Wait a minute. You get the final word, Mr.-

Joe Biden: (23:59)
Well, it’s hard to get any word in with this clown. Excuse me, this person.

Donald Trump: (24:02)
Hey, let me just tell you, Joe-

Joe Biden: (24:03)
No, no. Mr. President- [crosstalk 00:24:05]

Donald Trump: (24:04)
Three and a half million, Joe.

Joe Biden: (24:06)
That is simply not true.

Donald Trump: (24:07)
Why did he deserve three and a half million from Moscow?

Joe Biden: (24:09)
Look, here’s the deal. We want to talk about families and ethics. I don’t want to do that. I mean, his family, we could talk about all night. His family’s already-

Donald Trump: (24:19)
My family-

Moderator: (24:20)
No, no- [crosstalk 00:06:20].

Donald Trump: (24:20)
My family lost a fortune by coming down and helping us with governance.

Joe Biden: (24:24)
And that’s such a- [crosstalk 00:24:25]

Moderator: (24:25)
Mr. President-

Donald Trump: (24:26)
Every single one of them lost a fortune-

Joe Biden: (24:27)
This is not about my family or his family. It’s about your family, the American people. [crosstalk 00:24:32] That’s not true. It doesn’t want to talk about what you need. You, the American people, it’s about you. That’s what we’re talking about here. [crosstalk 00:24:42]

Moderator: (24:43)
That’s the end of the segment. We’re moving on.

Joe Biden: (24:46)
He didn’t take that.

Moderator: (24:47)
Vice President-

Donald Trump: (24:47)
Chris, can I be honest? It’s a very important question-

Joe Biden: (24:49)
Try to be honest.

Moderator: (24:50)
No.

Donald Trump: (24:50)
He stood up-

Moderator: (24:52)
The answer to the question is no.

Donald Trump: (24:53)
… and the threatened Ukraine-

Moderator: (24:55)
Sir-

Donald Trump: (24:55)
… with a billion dollars-

Joe Biden: (24:57)
That is absolutely not true.

Moderator: (25:01)
Stop. [crosstalk 00:25:02] Gentlemen, I hate to raise my voice, but I- [crosstalk 00:25:05] Why should I be different than the two of you? So here’s the deal.

Joe Biden: (25:09)
That’s a good point.

Moderator: (25:09)
We have six segments. We have ended that segment. We’re going to go to the next segment. In that segment, you each are going to have two uninterrupted moments. In those two interrupted minutes, Mr. President, you can say anything you want. I’m going to ask a question about race, but if you want to answer about something else, go ahead. But I think that the country would be better served, if we allowed both people to speak with fewer interruptions. I’m appealing to you, sir, to do that.

Donald Trump: (25:37)
Well, and him too.

Moderator: (25:38)
Well, frankly, you’ve been doing more interrupting than he has.

Donald Trump: (25:40)
Well, that’s all right, but he does plenty.

Moderator: (25:41)
Well, sir, less than-

Donald Trump: (25:43)
He does plenty.

Moderator: (25:43)
No, less than you have. Let’s please continue on. The issue of rice. Vice-President Biden, you say that President Trump’s response to the violence in Charlottesville three years ago, when he talked about very fine people on both sides, was what directly led you to launch this run for president.

Donald Trump: (26:05)
Oh yeah, sure.

Moderator: (26:06)
President Trump, you have often said that you believe you will have done more for Black Americans than any president with the possible exception of Abraham Lincoln.

Donald Trump: (26:16)
That’s true.

Moderator: (26:16)
My question for the two of you, is why should voters trust you rather than your opponent to deal with the race issues facing this country over the next four years? Vice President Biden, you go first.

Joe Biden: (26:29)
It’s about equity and equality. It’s about decency. It’s about the constitution. And we have never walked away from trying to require equity for everyone, equality for the whole of America. But we’ve never accomplished it, but we’ve never walked away from it like he has done. It is true, the reason I got in the race is when those people… Close your eyes, remember what those people look like coming out of the fields, carrying torches, their veins bulging, just spewing anti-Semitic bile and accompanied by the Ku Klux Klan. A young woman got killed and they asked the president what he thought. He said, “There were very fine people on both sides.” No president’s ever said anything like that. [crosstalk 00:27:10].

Moderator: (27:11)
It is his-

Joe Biden: (27:12)
Now-

Moderator: (27:12)
… minute sir.

Joe Biden: (27:13)
… second point I’d make to you, is that when Floyd was killed, when Mr. Floyd was killed, there was a peaceful protest in front of the White House. What did he do? He came out of his bunker, had the military use tear gas on them so he could walk across to a church and hold up a Bible. And then what happened after that? The Bishop of that very church said that it was a disgrace. The general who was with him said all he ever wants to do is divide people, not unite people at all. This is a president who has used everything as a dog whistle, to try to generate racists hatred, racist division.

Joe Biden: (27:50)
This is a man who, in fact, you talk about helping African-Americans, one in 1000 African Americans has been killed because of the coronavirus. And if he doesn’t do something quickly, by the end of the year, one in 500 will have been killed. One in 500 African Americans. This man is as a savior of African-Americans? This man cares at all? This man’s done virtually nothing. Look, the fact is that you have to look at what he talks about. You have to look at what he did. And what he did has been disastrous for the African-American community.

Donald Trump: (28:27)
So-

Moderator: (28:28)
President Trump, you have two minutes. Why should Americans trust you over your opponent to deal race issues?

Donald Trump: (28:34)
You did a crime bill, 1994, where you call them super predators. African-Americans are super predators and they’ve never forgotten it. They’ve never forgotten it.

Joe Biden: (28:43)
I’ve never said-

Moderator: (28:44)
No, no, sir. It’s his two minutes.

Donald Trump: (28:45)
So you did that and they call you a super predator and I’m letting people out of jail now, that you have treated the African-American population community, you have treated the black community about as bad as anybody in this country. You did the 1990… And that’s why, if you look at the polls, I’m doing better than any Republican has done in a long time, because they saw what you did. You call them super predators, and you’ve called them worse than that. Because you look back at your testimony over the years, you’ve called them a lot worse than that. As far as the church is concerned and as far as the generals are concerned, we just got the support of 250 military leaders and generals, total support. Law enforcement, almost every law enforcement group in the United States. I have Florida. I have Texas. I have Ohio. I have every… Excuse me, Portland, the sheriff just came out today and he said, “I support President Trump.”

Donald Trump: (29:39)
I don’t think you have any law enforcement. You can’t even say the word law enforcement. Because if you say those words, you’re going to lose all of your radical left supporters. And why aren’t you saying those words, Joe? Why don’t you say the words law enforcement? Because you know what? If called us in Portland, we would put out that fire in a half an hour. But they won’t do it, because they’re run by radical left Democrats. If you look at Chicago, if you look at any place you want to look, Seattle, they heard we were coming in the following day and they put up their hands and we got back Seattle. Minneapolis, we got it back, Joe, because we believe in law and order, but you don’t. The top 10 cities and just about the top 40 cities are run by Democrats, and in many cases radical left. And they’ve got you wrapped around their finger, Joe, to a point where you don’t want to say anything about law and order. And I’ll tell you what, the people of this country want and demand law and order and you’re afraid to even say it.

Moderator: (30:35)
All right. I want to return to the question of race. Vice President Biden, after the grand jury in the Breonna Taylor case decided not to charge any of the police with homicide, you said it raises the question, “Whether justice could be equally applied in America.” Do you believe that there is a separate but unequal system of justice for Blacks in this country?

Joe Biden: (30:59)
Yes, there is. There’s systemic injustice in this country, in education and work and in law enforcement and the way in which it’s enforced. But look, the vast majority of police officers are good, decent, honorable men and women. They risk their lives every day to take care of us, but there are some bad apples. And when they occur, when they find them, they have to be sorted out. They have to be held accountable. They have to be held accountable. And what I’m going to do as President of the United States is call together an entire group of people at the White House, everything from the civil rights groups, to the police officers, to the police chiefs, and we’re going to work this out.

Joe Biden: (31:38)
We’re going to work this out. So we changed the way in which we have more transparency, in when these things happen. These cops aren’t happy to see what happened to George Floyd. These cops aren’t happy to see what happened to Breonna Taylor. Most don’t like it, but we have to have a system where people are held accountable when… And by the way, violence in response is never appropriate, never appropriate. Peaceful protest is, violence is never appropriate.

Moderator: (32:04)
All right, Mr.-

Donald Trump: (32:05)
What is peaceful protest? When they run through the middle of the town-

Moderator: (32:08)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (32:09)
… and burn down your stores and kill people all over the place- [crosstalk 00:32:14].

Joe Biden: (32:11)
That is not peaceful protest.

Donald Trump: (32:13)
No it’s not, but you say it is.

Moderator: (32:15)
President Trump, I’d like to continue with the issue of race. I promise we’re going to get to the issue of law and order in a moment.

Donald Trump: (32:21)
Fine.

Moderator: (32:21)
This month, your administration directed federal agencies to end racial sensitivity training that addresses white privilege or critical race theory. Why did you decide to do that, to end racial sensitivity training? And do you believe that there is systemic racism in this country, sir?

Donald Trump: (32:42)
I ended it because it’s racist. I ended it because a lot of people were complaining that they were asked to do things that were absolutely insane. That it a radical revolution that was taking place in our military, in our schools, all over the place. And you know it, and so does everybody else. And he would know it- [crosstalk 00:33:02]

Moderator: (33:02)
What is radical about racial sensitivity training?

Donald Trump: (33:05)
If you were a certain person, you had no status in life. It was sort of a reversal. And if you look at the people, we were paying people hundreds of thousands of dollars to teach very bad ideas and frankly, very sick ideas. And really, they were teaching people to hate our country And I’m not going to do that. I’m not going to allow that to happen. We have to go back to the core values of this country. They were teaching people that our country is a horrible place. It’s a racist place. And they were teaching people to hate our country. And I’m not going to allow that to happen.

Moderator: (33:38)
Vice President Biden.

Joe Biden: (33:39)
Nobody’s doing that. He’s the racist.

Donald Trump: (33:42)
You just don’t know.

Joe Biden: (33:43)
Here’s the deal. I know a lot more about this- [crosstalk 00:15:43].

Moderator: (33:45)
Let him finish.

Joe Biden: (33:47)
The fact is that there is racial insensitivity. People have to be made aware of what other people feel like, what insults them, what is demeaning to them. It’s important people know. Many people don’t want to hurt other people’s feelings, but it makes a big difference. It makes a gigantic difference in the way a child is able to grow up and have a sense of self-esteem. It’s a little bit like how this guy and his friends look down on so many people. They look down their nose on people like Irish Catholics, like me, who grow up in Scranton. They look down on people who don’t have money. They look down on people who are of a different faith. They looked down on people who are a different color. In fact, we’re all Americans. The only way we’re going to bring this country together is bring everybody together. There’s nothing we cannot do, if we do it together. We can take this on and we can defeat racism in American.

Moderator: (34:41)
Vice President… I mean, President Trump, sir.

Donald Trump: (34:43)
During the Obama-Biden administration, there was tremendous division. There was hatred. You look at Ferguson, you look at, or you go to very… Many places, look at Oakland. Look what happened in Oakland. Look what happened in Baltimore. Look what happened… Frankly, it was more violent than what I’m even seeing now.

Joe Biden: (35:01)
Oh my Lord.

Donald Trump: (35:01)
But the reason-

Joe Biden: (35:02)
This is ridiculous.

Donald Trump: (35:03)
… is that the Democrats that run these cities-

Joe Biden: (35:05)
Absolutely ridiculous.

Donald Trump: (35:06)
… don’t want to talk, like you, about law and order.

Joe Biden: (35:08)
Violent crime-

Donald Trump: (35:09)
And you still haven’t mentioned. Are you in favor of law and order?

Joe Biden: (35:12)
I’m in favor of law. You- [crosstalk 00:35:15].

Donald Trump: (35:14)
Are you in favor of law and order? [crosstalk 00:35:17]

Moderator: (35:16)
You asked a question, let him finish. [crosstalk 00:35:18] Let him answer.

Joe Biden: (35:20)
Law and order with justice, where people get treated fairly.

Donald Trump: (35:23)
Okay.

Joe Biden: (35:24)
And the fact of the matter is, violent crime went down 17%, 15% in our administration. It’s gone up on his watch.

Donald Trump: (35:31)
It went down much more in ours.

Moderator: (35:33)
All right, we’re done- [crosstalk 00:35:35] Mr. President, you’re going to be very happy because we’re now going to talk about law and order.

Donald Trump: (35:41)
The places we had trouble were democratic run cities-

Moderator: (35:44)
That’s exactly my question. There has been a dramatic increase in homicides in America this summer particularly, and you often blame that on democratic mayors and democratic governors. But in fact, there have been equivalent spikes in Republican led cities, like Tulsa and Fort Worth. So the question is, is this really a…

Moderator: (36:03)
It’s like Tulsa and Fort worth. So the question is, is this really a party issue?

Donald Trump: (36:05)
I think as a party issue, you can bring in a couple of examples but if you look at Chicago, what’s going on in Chicago where a 53 people were shot and eight died shot, if you look at New York where it’s going up, like nobody’s ever seen anything. The numbers are going up a 100%, 150%, 200% crime, it is crazy what’s going on and he doesn’t want to say law and order because he can’t because he’ll lose his radical left supporters and once he does that, it’s over with. But if he ever got to run this country and they ran it the way he would want to run it, we would have by the way our suburbs would be gone. And you would see problems like you’ve never seen before.

Joe Biden: (36:45)
He wouldn’t know a suburb unless you took a wrong turn.

Donald Trump: (36:47)
Oh, I know suburbs so much that you.

Moderator: (36:48)
Gentlemen wait a minute.

Joe Biden: (36:50)
I was raised in the suburbs. This is not 1950. All these dog whistles and racism don’t work anymore. Suburbs are by and large integrated. There’s many people today driving their kids to soccer practice and/or black and white and Hispanic in the same car as there have been any time in the past, what really is a threat to the suburbs and their safety is his failure to deal with COVID. They’re dying in the suburbs. His failure to deal with the environment, they’re being flooded, they’re being burned out because his refusal to do anything. That’s why the suburbs are in trouble.

Moderator: (37:23)
I do want to talk about this issue of law and order though. And in the joint recommendation that came from the Biden-Bernie Sanders task force, you talked about quote re-imagining policing. First of all, what does re-imagining policing mean and do you support? If I might finish the question, what does re-imagining policing mean and do you support the Black Lives Matter call for community control of policing?

Joe Biden: (37:54)
Look, what I support are the police having the opportunity to deal with the problems they face and I’m totally opposed to defunding the police offices. As a matter of fact police, local police, the only one defunding in his budget calls for a $400 million cut in local law enforcement assistance. They need more assistance. They need when they show up for a 9-11 call to have someone with them as a psychologist or psychiatrist to keep them from having to use force and be able to talk people down. We have to have community policing like we had before where the officers get to know the people in the communities. That’s when crime went down, it didn’t go up. It went down. And so we have to be…

Donald Trump: (38:35)
That’s not what they are talking about this. That’s not what it is about. He’s talking about defunding the police.

Joe Biden: (38:39)
That is not true.

Donald Trump: (38:40)
He doesn’t have any law support. He has no law enforcement.

Joe Biden: (38:45)
That’s not true.

Donald Trump: (38:45)
He has almost nothing. Oh, really, who do you have name one group that supports you name one group that came out and supported you. Go ahead. Think we have time.

Joe Biden: (38:54)
We don’t have time to do anything.

Donald Trump: (38:55)
No, no think right now. Name one law enforcement group that came out in support of you.

Moderator: (39:00)
Now, gentleman. I think I’m going to tell I’m going to take back the bottom line.

Donald Trump: (39:03)
There aren’t any.

Moderator: (39:04)
And I want to get to another subject, which is the issue of protests in many cities that have turned violent in Portland, Oregon, especially we had more than a 100 straight days of protests, which I think you would agree, you talk about peaceful protests. Many of those turned into riots. Mr. Vice-president you say that people who commit crimes should be held accountable. The question I have though is as the democratic nominee, and earlier tonight, you said that you are the Democratic Party right now, have you ever called the Democratic Mayor of Portland or the Democratic Governor of Oregon and said, “Hey, you got to stop this, bring in the National Guard, do whatever it takes, but you’d stop the days and months of violence in Portland.”

Joe Biden: (39:50)
I don’t hold public office. Now I am a former vice president. I’ve made it clear. I’ve made it clear in my public statements that the violence should be prosecuted. It should be prosecuted and anyone who committed it should be prosecuted.

Moderator: (40:02)
But you’ve never called for the people…

Donald Trump: (40:02)
He’s never done that.

Moderator: (40:02)
Excuse me, sir. You had never called for the leaders in Portland and in Oregon to call and bring in the National Guard and knock off a 100 days of riots.

Joe Biden: (40:15)
They can in fact take care of it if he just stay out of the way.

Donald Trump: (40:19)
Oh really? I sent in the US Marshalls to get the killer of a young man in the middle of the street and they shot him for three days Portland didn’t do anything. I sent in the US Marshals they took care of business.

Moderator: (40:33)
Go ahead sir.

Joe Biden: (40:34)
And by the way his own former spokesperson said, “Riots and chaos and violence help he cause.” That’s what this is all about.

Donald Trump: (40:43)
I don’t know who said that.

Joe Biden: (40:44)
I do.

Donald Trump: (40:45)
Who?

Joe Biden: (40:46)
I think Kellyanne Conway.

Donald Trump: (40:48)
I don’t think she said that.

Joe Biden: (40:48)
She said that.

Donald Trump: (40:49)
I don’t think so.

Joe Biden: (40:50)
Here’s the point, the point is that that’s why he keeps trying to rile everything up. He doesn’t want to calm things down instead of going in and talking to people and saying, “Let’s get everybody together. Figure out how to deal with this.” What’s he do? He just pours gasoline in the fire constantly and every single solitary time.

Moderator: (41:10)
Okay. And to end this, button up this segment I’m going to give you a minute to answer, sir. You have repeatedly criticized…

Donald Trump: (41:16)
Does it mean I have to answer his stuff.

Moderator: (41:17)
You have repeatedly…

Donald Trump: (41:18)
Wait a second, you have made a statement.

Moderator: (41:19)
You’ve been talking back and forth. I’m asking you.

Donald Trump: (41:22)
I would love to end it.

Moderator: (41:24)
You know sir if you want to switch seats we could very quickly can do that.

Donald Trump: (41:28)
I’ll send in the National Guard, it would be over. That’d be no problem. But I don’t want to accept the National Guard.

Moderator: (41:33)
You have repeatedly criticized the vice president for not specifically calling out Antifa and other left wing extremist groups. But are you willing tonight to condemn white supremacists and militia group and to say that they need to stand down and not add to the violence in a number of these cities as we saw in Kenosha and as we’ve seen in Portland.

Donald Trump: (41:57)
Sure, I’m will to do that.

Moderator: (41:59)
Are you prepared specifically to do it.

Donald Trump: (42:00)
I would say almost everything I see is from the left wing not from the right wing.

Moderator: (42:04)
But what are you saying?

Donald Trump: (42:06)
I’m willing to do anything. I want to see peace.

Moderator: (42:08)
Well, do it, sir.

Joe Biden: (42:09)
Say it, do it say it.

Donald Trump: (42:10)
What do you want to call them? Give me a name, give me a name, go ahead who do you want me to condemn.

Moderator: (42:14)
White supremacist and right-wing militia.

Joe Biden: (42:14)
Proud Boys.

Donald Trump: (42:18)
Proud Boys, stand back and stand by. But I’ll tell you what somebody’s got to do something about Antifa and the left because this is not a right wing problem this is a left wing…

Joe Biden: (42:28)
His own FBI Director said unlike white supremacist, Antifa is an idea not an organization-

Donald Trump: (42:35)
Oh you got to be kidding me.

Joe Biden: (42:36)
… not a militia. That’s what his FBI Director said.

Donald Trump: (42:41)
Well, then you know what, he’s wrong.

Moderator: (42:42)
We’re done, sir. Moving onto the next… [crosstalk 00:42:46]

Donald Trump: (42:46)
Antifa is bad.

Joe Biden: (42:47)
Every body in your administration tells you the truth, it’s a bad idea. You have no idea about anything.

Donald Trump: (42:53)
You know what, Antifa is a dangerous radical group.

Moderator: (42:56)
All right, gentlemen we’re now moving onto the Trump-Biden record.

Donald Trump: (42:58)
And you ought to be careful of them, they’ll over throw you.

Moderator: (43:00)
I’m going to ask a question. When the president seeks a second term, it is generally a referendum on his record but vice president Biden, you’d like to quote one of your dad’s sayings, which is don’t compare me to the almighty, compare me to the alternative. And in this case sir you are the alternative. Looking at both of your records, I’m going to ask each of you. Why should voters elect you president over your opponent in this segment, President Trump you’ll go first, two minutes.

Donald Trump: (43:30)
Because there is never been an administration or president who has done more than I’ve done in a period of three and a half years. And that’s despite the impeachment hoax and you so what happened today with Hillary Clinton, where it was a whole big con job. But despite going through all of these things where I had a fight, both flanks and behind me and above there has never been an administration that’s done what I’ve done. The greatest, before COVID came in the greatest economy in history, lowest unemployment numbers, everything was good. Everything was going.

Donald Trump: (44:03)
And by the way, there was unity going to happen. People were calling me for the first time in years, they were calling and they were saying it’s time maybe and then what happened? We got hit. But now we’re building it back up again. A rebuilding of the military, including Space Force and all of the other things. A fixing of the VA which was a mess under him, 308,000 people died because they didn’t have proper health care. It was a mess. And we now got a 91% approval rating at the VA, our vets. We take care of our vets. But we’ve rebuilt our military. And I’ll tell you something, some people say maybe the most important by the end of the first term I’ll have approximately 300 Federal judges and Court of Appeals judges, 300 and hopefully three great Supreme Court judges, justices that is a record the likes of which very few people and one of the reasons I’ll have so many judges because President Obama and him left me 128 judges to fill.

Donald Trump: (45:05)
When you leave office, you don’t leave any judges. That’s like, you just don’t do that. They left 128 openings and if I were a member of his party, because they have a little different philosophy, I’d say, if you left us 128 openings you can’t be a good president. You can’t be a good vice president but I want to thank you because it gives us almost, it’ll probably be above that number. By the end of this term, 300 judges. It’s a record.

Moderator: (45:34)
Looking at both of your records. Why should voters elect you President as opposed to president Trump, you have two minutes uninterrupted.

Joe Biden: (45:42)
Under this president, we become weaker, sicker, poor, more divided and more violent. When I was vice president, we inherited a recession. I was asked to fix it. I did. We left him a booming economy and he caused the recession. With regard to being weaker, the fact is that I’ve gone head to head with Putin and made it clear to him we’re not going to take any of his stuff. He’s Putin’s puppy. He still refuses to even say anything to Putin about the bounty on the heads of American soldiers.

Donald Trump: (46:14)
You son got three and a half million dollars.

Joe Biden: (46:17)
By the way, my son…

Moderator: (46:19)
Wait a minute. Mr. President, your campaign agreed to both sides would get two minute answers, uninterrupted. Well, you’re a side agreed to it and why don’t you observe what your campaign agreed to as a ground rule. Okay, sir?

Joe Biden: (46:33)
He never keeps his word.

Moderator: (46:34)
No, that was a rhetorical question.

Joe Biden: (46:37)
Can you get back 30 seconds?

Moderator: (46:39)
Yes. You may have, go ahead.

Joe Biden: (46:42)
So thirdly, we’re poor. The billionaires have gotten much more wealthy by a tune of over $3- $400 billion more just since COVID. You in the home, you got less you’re in more trouble than you were before. In terms of being more violent. When we were in office there were 15% less violence in America than there is today. He’s President United States. It’s on his watch. And with regard to more divided the nation, it can’t stay divided. We can’t be this way. And speaking of my son, the way you talk about the military, the way you talk about them being losers and being and just being suckers. My son was in Iraq. He spent a year there. He got the Brown Star. He got the Conspicuous Service Medal. He was not a loser. He was a Patriot and the people left behind there were heroes.

Donald Trump: (47:39)
Really?

Joe Biden: (47:39)
And I resent-

Donald Trump: (47:40)
Are you talking Hunter, are you talking about Hunter.

Joe Biden: (47:42)
I’m talking about my son, Beau Biden, you’re talking about Hunter?

Donald Trump: (47:44)
I don’t know Beau. I know Hunter. Hunter got thrown out of the military. He was thrown out dishonorably discharged.

Joe Biden: (47:51)
That’s not true he was not dishonorably discharged.

Donald Trump: (47:53)
For cocaine use. And he didn’t have a job until you became vice president.

Joe Biden: (47:56)
None of that is true.

Donald Trump: (47:56)
Once you became vice president he made a fortune in Ukraine, in China, in Moscow and various other places.

Joe Biden: (48:01)
That is not true.

Donald Trump: (48:04)
He made a fortune and he didn’t have a job.

Joe Biden: (48:07)
My son like a lot of people at home had a drug problem. He’s overtaking it. He’s fixed it. He’s worked on it. And I’m proud of him, I’m proud of my son.

Donald Trump: (48:17)
But why was he given tens of millions of dollars?

Joe Biden: (48:19)
He wasn’t given tens of millions of dollars. [crosstalk 00:48:23] It was all discredited.

Moderator: (48:27)
We’ve already been through this. I think the American people would rather hear about more substantial subjects. Well, as the moderator, sir, I’m going to make a judgment call here.

Donald Trump: (48:35)
I know but when somebody gets three and a half million dollars from the Mayor of Moscow.

Joe Biden: (48:39)
That is not true. That report is totally discredited.

Donald Trump: (48:43)
Why did he get it?

Joe Biden: (48:45)
Mitt Romney on that committee said it wasn’t worth taxpayer’s money. That report was written for political reason.

Moderator: (48:50)
I’d like to talk about climate change.

Joe Biden: (48:52)
So would I.

Moderator: (48:53)
Okay. The forest fires in the West are raging now. They have burned millions of acres. They have displaced hundreds of thousands of people. When state officials there blamed the fires on climate change. Mr. President, you said, I don’t think the science knows. Over your four years, you have pulled the US out of the Paris Climate Accord. You have rolled back a number of Obama Environmental records, what do you believe about the science of climate change and what will you do in the next four years to confront it?

Donald Trump: (49:27)
I want crystal clean water and air. I want beautiful clean air. We have now the lowest carbon… If you look at our numbers right now, we are doing phenomenally. But I haven’t destroyed our businesses. Our businesses aren’t put out of commission. If you look at the Paris Accord, it was a disaster from our standpoint. And people are actually very happy about what’s going on because our businesses are doing well. As far as the fires are concerned, you need forest management. In addition to everything else, the forest floors are loaded up with trees, dead trees that are years old and they’re like tinder and leaves and everything else. You drop a cigarette in there the whole forest burns down. You’ve got to have forest management.

Moderator: (50:09)
What do you believe about the science of climate change, sir?

Donald Trump: (50:13)
I believe that we have to do everything we can to have immaculate air immaculate water and do whatever else we can that’s good. We’re planting a billion trees, the Billion Tree Project and it’s very exciting for a lot of people.

Moderator: (50:25)
You believe that human pollution, gas, greenhouse gas emissions contributes to the global warming of this planet.

Donald Trump: (50:32)
I think a lot of things do, but I think to an extent, yes. I think to an extent, yes, but I also think we have to do better management of our forest. Every year I get the call. California’s burning, California’s burning. If that was cleaned, if that were, if you had forest management, good forest management, you wouldn’t be getting those calls. In Europe, they live they’re forest cities. They call forest cities. They maintain their forest. They manage their forest. I was with the head of a major country, it’s a forest city. He said, “Sir, we have trees that are far more, they ignite much easier than California. There shouldn’t be that problem.” I spoke with the Governor about it. I’m getting along very well with the governor. But I said, “At some point you can’t every year have hundreds of thousands of acres of land just burned to the ground.” That’s burning down because of a lack of management.

Moderator: (51:25)
But sir if you believe in the science of climate change, why have you rolled back the Obama Clean Power Plan which limited carbon emissions and power plants? Why have you relaxed…?

Donald Trump: (51:35)
Because it was driving energy prices through the sky.

Joe Biden: (51:38)
Why have you relaxed fuel economy standards that are going to create more pollution from cars and trucks?

Donald Trump: (51:44)
Well, not really because what’s happening is the car is much less expensive and it’s a much safer car and you talk it about a tiny difference. And then what would happen because of the cost of the car you would have at least double and triple the number of cars purchased. We have the old slugs out there that are 10, 12 years old. If you did that, the car would be safer. It would be much cheaper by $3,500.

Moderator: (52:06)
But in the case of California they have simply ignored that.

Donald Trump: (52:08)
No, but you would take a lot of cars off the market because people would be able to afford a car. Now, by the way, we’re going to see how that turns out. But a lot of people agree with me, many people. The car has gotten so expensive because they have computers all over the place for an extra little bit of gasoline. And I’m okay with electric cars too. I think I’m all for electric cars. I’ve given big incentives for electric cars but what they’ve done in California is just crazy.

Moderator: (52:34)
All right, Vice president Biden. I’d like you to respond to the president’s climate change record but I also want to ask you about a concern. You propose $2 trillion in green jobs. You talk about new limits, not abolishing, but new limits on fracking. Ending the use of fossil fuels to generate electricity by 2035 and zero none admission of greenhouse gases by 2050. The president says a lot of these things would tank the economy and cost millions of jobs.

Joe Biden: (53:03)
He’s absolutely wrong, number one. Number two, if in fact, during our administration in the recovery act, I was in charge able to bring down the cost of renewable energy to cheaper than are as cheap as coal and gas and oil. Nobody’s going to build another coal fired plant in America. No one’s going to build another oil fire plant in America. They’re going to move to renewable energy. Number one, number two, we’re going to make sure that we are able to take the federal fleet and turn it into a fleet that’s run on their electric vehicles. Making sure that we can do that, we’re going to put 500,000 charging stations in all of the highways that we’re going to be building in the future. We’re going to build a economy that in fact is going to provide for the ability of us to take 4 million buildings and make sure that they in fact are weatherized in a way that in fact will they’ll emit significantly less gas and oil because the heat will not be going out. There’s so many things that we can do…

Joe Biden: (54:03)
Gas and oil because the heat will not be going out. There’s so many things that we can do now to create thousands and thousands of jobs. We can get to net zero, in terms of energy production, by 2035. Not only not costing people jobs, creating jobs, creating millions of good-paying jobs. Not 15 bucks an hour, but prevailing wage, by having a new infrastructure that in fact, is green. And the first thing I will do, I will rejoin the Paris Accord. I will join the Paris Accord because with us out of it, look what’s happening. It’s all falling apart. And talk about someone who has no relationship with foreign policy. The rainforests of Brazil are being torn down, are being ripped down. More carbon is absorbed in that rainforest than every bit of carbon that’s emitted in the United States. Instead of doing something about that, I would be gathering up and making sure we had the countries of the world coming up with $20 billion, and say, “Here’s $20 billion. Stop tearing down the forest. And If you don’t, then you’re going to have significant economic consequences.”

Moderator: (55:11)
What about the argument that President Trump basically says, that you have to balance environmental interests and economic interests? And he’s drawn his line.

Joe Biden: (55:21)
Well, he hasn’t drawn a line. He wants to make sure that methane’s not a problem. You can now emit more methane without it being a problem. Methane. This is a guy who says that you don’t have to have mileage standards for automobiles that exist now. This is the guy who says that, the fact that-

Donald Trump: (55:39)
Not true. Not true-

Joe Biden: (55:40)
It’s all true. And here’s the deal-

Donald Trump: (55:42)
He’s talking about the Green New Deal. And it’s not 2 billion [crosstalk 00:55:45] or 20 billion, as you said [crosstalk 00:55:46]. It’s $100 trillion.

Joe Biden: (55:49)
I’m talking about the Biden plan [crosstalk 00:55:51]-

Moderator: (55:50)
Let him go for a minute, and then you can go.

Donald Trump: (55:52)
And rebuild the building.

Joe Biden: (55:53)
No.

Donald Trump: (55:53)
It’s the dumbest-

Joe Biden: (55:54)
That is not-

Donald Trump: (55:54)
… most ridiculous [crosstalk 00:55:56] where two car systems are out-

Joe Biden: (55:59)
Not true-

Donald Trump: (56:00)
… where they want to take out the cows too.

Joe Biden: (56:01)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (56:01)
That’s not true either, right?

Joe Biden: (56:03)
Not true.

Donald Trump: (56:04)
This is a 100 trillion-

Joe Biden: (56:06)
Simply… Look-

Donald Trump: (56:06)
That’s more money than our country could make in 100 years [crosstalk 00:02:10]-

Joe Biden: (56:09)
That is simply not the case-

Moderator: (56:14)
All right. Let me [crosstalk 00:02:12]. Wait a minute, sir. I actually have studied your plan, and it includes upgrading 4 million buildings, weatherizing 2 million homes over four years, building one and a half million energy efficient homes. So the question becomes, the president is saying, I think some people who support the president would say, that sounds like it’s going to cost a lot of money and hurt the economy.

Joe Biden: (56:38)
What it’s going to do, it’s going to create thousands and millions of jobs. Good paying jobs [crosstalk 00:02:41].

Moderator: (56:42)
Let him finish, sir.

Joe Biden: (56:43)
He doesn’t know how to do that-

Donald Trump: (56:45)
100 million dollars.

Joe Biden: (56:46)
The fact is, it’s going to create millions of good paying jobs, and these tax incentives for people to weatherize, which he wants to get rid of. It’s going to make the economy much safer. Look how much we’re paying now to deal with the hurricanes, deal with… By the way, he has an answer for hurricanes. He said, maybe we should drop a nuclear weapon on them, and they may-

Donald Trump: (57:05)
I never said that at all-

Joe Biden: (57:06)
Yeah, he did say that-

Donald Trump: (57:06)
They made it up.

Joe Biden: (57:08)
And here’s the deal-

Donald Trump: (57:09)
You make up a lot-

Joe Biden: (57:10)
… we’re going to be in a position where we can create hard, hard, good jobs by making sure the environment is clean, and we all are in better shape. We spend billions of dollars now, billions of dollars, on floods, hurricanes, rising seas. We’re in real trouble. Look what’s happened just in the Midwest with these storms that come through and wipe out entire sections and counties in Iowa. They didn’t happen before. They’re because of global warming. We make up 15% of the world’s problem. But the rest of the world, we’ve got to get them to come along. That’s why we have to get back into the Paris Accord.

Moderator: (57:52)
All right, gentlemen-

Donald Trump: (57:52)
Wait a minute, Chris. So why didn’t he do it for 47 years? You were vice president-

Joe Biden: (57:56)
For 47-

Donald Trump: (57:56)
So why didn’t you get the world… China sends up real dirt into the air. Russia does. India does. They all do. We’re supposed to be good. And by the way, he made a couple of statements. The Green New Deal is a hundred trillion dollars.

Joe Biden: (58:08)
That is not my plan [crosstalk 00:58:10]. The Green New Deal [crosstalk 00:58:14] is not my plan. [crosstalk 00:58:15]-

Moderator: (58:15)
Gentlemen-

Donald Trump: (58:16)
He made a statement about the military. He said I said something about the military. He and his friends made it up, and then they went with it. I never said it.

Moderator: (58:23)
Okay. [crosstalk 00:58:24] Mr. Vice President-

Donald Trump: (58:28)
He called the military stupid bastards.

Joe Biden: (58:28)
I did not say that-

Donald Trump: (58:31)
He said it on tape. [crosstalk 00:58:32]-

Moderator: (58:31)
Please, sir. [crosstalk 00:58:33] Stop.

Donald Trump: (58:34)
I would never say that [crosstalk 00:58:35]-

Joe Biden: (58:35)
Play it. Play it-

Moderator: (58:36)
Stop. Go ahead-

Donald Trump: (58:37)
You’re on tape-

Moderator: (58:38)
Mr. Vice President answered his final question.

Joe Biden: (58:41)
The final question is, I can’t remember which of all his rantings [crosstalk 00:04:44].

Moderator: (58:44)
I’m having a little trouble myself, but…

Joe Biden: (58:47)
Yeah.

Moderator: (58:48)
And about the economy and about this question of what it’s going to cost.

Joe Biden: (58:52)
The economy-

Moderator: (58:53)
The Green New Deal and the idea of what your environmental changes will do-

Joe Biden: (58:57)
The Green New Deal will pay for itself as we move forward. We’re not going to build plants that, in fact, are great polluting plants-

Moderator: (59:05)
So, do you support the Green New Deal?

Joe Biden: (59:07)
Pardon me?

Moderator: (59:08)
Do you support the-

Joe Biden: (59:08)
No, I don’t support the Green New Deal.

Donald Trump: (59:10)
Oh, you don’t? Oh, well, that’s a big statement.

Joe Biden: (59:12)
I support [crosstalk 00:05:13]-

Donald Trump: (59:13)
You just lost the radical left.

Joe Biden: (59:15)
I support [crosstalk 00:59:17] the Biden plan that I put forward.

Moderator: (59:19)
Okay.

Joe Biden: (59:19)
The Biden plan, which is different than what he calls the radical Green New Deal.

Moderator: (59:24)
All right, gentlemen, final segment, election integrity. As we meet tonight, millions of Americans are receiving mail-in ballots or going to vote early. How confident should we be that this will be a fair election, and what are you prepared to do over the next five plus weeks? Because it will not only be to election day, but also counting some mail-in ballots after election day. What are you prepared to do to reassure the American people that the next president will be the legitimate winner of this election. In this final segment, Mr. Vice President, you go first.

Joe Biden: (01:00:02)
Prepare to let people vote. They should go to iwillvote.com, decide how they’re going to vote, when they’re going to vote, and what means by which they’re going to vote. His own Homeland Security director, and as well as the FBI director, says that there is no evidence at all that mail-in ballots are a source of being manipulated and cheating. They said that. The fact is that there are going to be millions of people because of COVID that are going to be voting by mail-in ballots like he does, by the way. He sits behind the Resolute Desk and sends his ballot to Florida, number one. Number two, we’re going to make sure that those people who want to vote in person are able to vote because there are enough poll watchers are there to make sure they can socially distance. The polls are open on time, and the polls stay open until the votes are counted. And this is all about trying to dissuade people from voting because he’s trying to scare people into thinking that it’s not going to be legitimate.

Joe Biden: (01:00:55)
Show up and vote. You will determine the outcome of this election. Vote, vote, vote. If you’re able to vote early in your state, vote early. If you’re able to vote in person, vote in person. Vote whatever way is the best way for you, because you will… He cannot stop you from being able to determine the outcome of this election. And in terms of whether or not… When the votes are counted and they’re all counted, that will be accepted. If I win, that will be accepted. If I lose, that’ll be accepted. But by the way, if in fact he says, he’s not sure what he’s going to accept. Well, let me tell you something, it doesn’t matter, because if we get the votes, it’s going to be all over. He’s going to go. He can’t stay in power. It won’t happen. It won’t happen, so vote. Just make sure you understand, you have it in your control to determine what this country is going to look like the next four years. Is it going to change, or are you going to get four more years of these lies?

Moderator: (01:01:52)
Mr. President, two minutes.

Donald Trump: (01:01:53)
So when I listen to Joe talking about a transition, there has been no transition from when I won. I won that election. And if you look at crooked Hillary Clinton, if you look at all of the different people, there was no transition, because they came after me trying to do a coup. They came after me spying on my campaign. They started from the day I won, and even before I won. From the day I came down the escalator with our first lady, they were a disaster. They were a disgrace to our country, and we’ve caught them. We’ve caught them all. We’ve got it all on tape. We’ve caught them all. And by the way, you gave the idea for the Logan Act against General Flynn. You better take a look at that, because we caught you in a sense, and President Obama was sitting in the office.

Donald Trump: (01:02:35)
He knew about it too. So don’t tell me about a free transition. As far as the ballots are concerned, it’s a disaster. A solicited ballot, okay, solicited, is okay. You’re soliciting. You’re asking. They send it back. You send it back. I did that. If you have an unsolicited… They’re sending millions of ballots all over the country. There’s fraud. They found them in creeks. They found some, just happened to have the name Trump just the other day in a wastepaper basket. They’re being sent all over the place. They sent two in a Democrat area. They sent out a thousand ballots. Everybody got two ballots. This is going to be a fraud like you’ve never seen. The other thing, it’s nice. On November 3rd, you’re watching, and you see who won the election. And I think we’re going to do well because people are really happy with the job we’ve done.

Donald Trump: (01:03:22)
But you know what? We won’t know. We might not know for months because these ballots are going to be all over. Take a look at what happened in Manhattan. Take a look at what happened in New Jersey. Take a look at what happened in Virginia and other places. They’re not losing 2%, 1%, which by the way is too much. An election could be won or lost with that. They’re losing 30 and 40%. It’s a fraud, and it’s a shame. And can you imagine where they say, “You have to have your ballot in by November 10th.” November 10th. That’s seven days after the election, in theory, should have been announced. We have major states [crosstalk 01:03:58] with that-

Moderator: (01:03:58)
Sir.

Donald Trump: (01:03:58)
… all run by Democrats-

Moderator: (01:03:59)
Two minutes is two minutes.

Donald Trump: (01:04:00)
All run by Democrats.

Moderator: (01:04:02)
President Trump-

Donald Trump: (01:04:02)
It’s a rigged election.

Moderator: (01:04:04)
You’re going to be able to continue. You have been charging for months that mail-in balloting is going to be a disaster. You say it’s rigged [crosstalk 00:01:04:11], that it’s going to lead to fraud. But in 2018, in the last midterm election, 31 million people voted mail-in voting. That was more than a quarter of all the voters that year, cast their ballots by mail. Now that millions of mail-in ballots have gone out, what are you going to do about it? And are you counting on the Supreme Court, including a Justice Barrett, to settle any dispute?

Donald Trump: (01:04:38)
Yeah. I think I’m counting on them to look at the ballots, definitely. I hope we don’t need them, in terms of the election itself. But for the ballots, I think so, because what’s happening is incredible. I read today where at least 1% of the ballots for 2016 were invalidated. They take them. We don’t like them. We don’t like them. They throw them out-

Moderator: (01:04:59)
But what are you going to do about it-

Donald Trump: (01:04:59)
… left and right.

Moderator: (01:05:00)
There are millions of ballots going out right now. What are you going to do-

Donald Trump: (01:05:02)
What you do is you go and vote. You do a solicited ballot, and that’s okay-

Moderator: (01:05:05)
No. No. I know your complaint [crosstalk 01:05:05]. I’m asking you about the fact that millions of people have received-

Donald Trump: (01:05:08)
You go and vote. You go and vote-

Moderator: (01:05:11)
No. But what I’m saying is [crosstalk 01:05:11], what are you going to do about the fact that millions of people-

Donald Trump: (01:05:14)
You either do, Chris, a solicited ballot, where you’re sending it in, they’re sending it back and you’re sending. They have mailmen with lots of it. Did you see what’s going on? Take a look at West Virginia, mailman selling the ballots. They’re being sold. They’re being dumped in rivers. This is a horrible thing for our country.

Joe Biden: (01:05:30)
There is no [crosstalk 01:05:32]… There is no evidence of that-

Donald Trump: (01:05:33)
This is not going to end well.

Joe Biden: (01:05:34)
There is no evidence of that-

Donald Trump: (01:05:34)
This is not going to end well-

Moderator: (01:05:37)
Okay. Vice President Biden, in fact, go ahead, sir-

Joe Biden: (01:05:37)
Five states have had mail-in ballots for the last decade or more. Five, including two Republican states. And you don’t have to solicit the ballot. It’s sent to you. It’s sent to your home. What they’re saying is that it has to be a postmark by election day. If it doesn’t get in until the seventh, eighth, ninth, it still should be counted. He’s just afraid of counting the votes-

Donald Trump: (01:06:03)
You’re wrong. You’re wrong [crosstalk 01:06:04]. I love counting the votes [crosstalk 01:06:05]-

Moderator: (01:06:05)
I want to continue with you on this [crosstalk 01:06:06] Vice President Biden-

Donald Trump: (01:06:07)
Chris, he’s so wrong when he makes a statement like that-

Moderator: (01:06:09)
No. Excuse me. Vice President Biden, the biggest problem, in fact, over the years with mail-in voting has not been fraud, historically. It has been that sizable numbers, sometimes hundreds of thousands of ballots are thrown out because they have not been properly filled out, or there is some other irregularity, or they missed [crosstalk 01:06:28] the deadline. So the question I have is, are you concerned that the Supreme Court with a Justice Barrett will settle any dispute?

Joe Biden: (01:06:36)
I am concerned that any court would settle this, because here’s the deal. When you get a ballot and you fill it out, you’re supposed to have an affidavit. If you didn’t know, you have someone say that, this is me. You should be able to, if in fact you can verify that’s you before the ballot is thrown out, that’s sufficient to be able to count the ballot because someone made a mistake and not dotting the correct I. Who they voted for, testify, say who they voted for, say it’s you. That is totally legitimate.

Moderator: (01:07:09)
All right.

Donald Trump: (01:07:10)
Excuse me [crosstalk 01:07:11]-

Moderator: (01:07:12)
No. No. No. I have a final [crosstalk 00:13:12]. Gentlemen, I have a final question [crosstalk 01:07:14]-

Donald Trump: (01:07:15)
You know it can’t be done. You know it can’t, and already, there’s been fraud [crosstalk 01:07:19]-

Joe Biden: (01:07:19)
Mail service delivers [crosstalk 01:07:21] 185 million pieces of mail a day [crosstalk 01:07:24]-

Moderator: (01:07:24)
We can keep talking. In eight states, [crosstalk 01:07:27] election workers are prohibited, currently by law, eight states, from even beginning to process ballots, even take them out of the envelopes and flatten them until election day. That means that it’s likely, because there’s going to be a huge increase in mail-in balloting, that we are not going to know on election night who the winner is, that it could be days. It could be weeks-

Donald Trump: (01:07:50)
Could be months-

Moderator: (01:07:50)
… until we find out who the new president is. First for you, sir. Finally, for the vice president, and I hope neither of you will interrupt the other. Will you urge your supporters to stay calm during this extended period, not to engage in any civil unrest? And will you pledge tonight that you will not declare victory until the election has been independently certified? President Trump, you go first-

Donald Trump: (01:08:16)
I’m urging my supporters to go in to the polls and watch very carefully, because that’s what has to happen. I am urging them to do it. As you know, today there was a big problem. In Philadelphia, they went in to watch. They’re called poll watchers, a very safe, very nice thing. They were thrown out. They weren’t allowed to watch. You know why? Because bad things happen in Philadelphia. Bad things. And I am urging my people. I hope it’s going to be a fair election. If it’s a fair election-

Moderator: (01:08:44)
You’re urging them what?

Donald Trump: (01:08:45)
… I am 100% on board. But if I see tens of thousands of ballots being manipulated, I can’t go along with that. And I’ll tell you why-

Moderator: (01:08:53)
What does that mean, not go along-

Donald Trump: (01:08:53)
… from a common sense-

Moderator: (01:08:54)
Does that mean you’re going to tell your people-

Donald Trump: (01:08:55)
I’ll tell you what it means-

Moderator: (01:08:55)
… to take to the streets?

Donald Trump: (01:08:56)
It means you have a fraudulent election. You’re sending out 80 million ballots-

Moderator: (01:09:00)
And what would you do about that?

Donald Trump: (01:09:01)
They’re not equipped… These people aren’t equipped to handle it, number one. Number two, they cheat. They cheat. Hey, they found ballots in a wastepaper basket three days ago, and they all had the name military ballots. There were military. They all had the name Trump on them.

Moderator: (01:09:17)
Vice President Biden-

Donald Trump: (01:09:17)
You think that’s good?

Moderator: (01:09:18)
Vice President Biden, final question for you. Will you urge your supporters to stay calm while the vote is counted? And will you pledge not to declare victory until the election is independently certified?

Joe Biden: (01:09:30)
Yes. And here’s the deal. We count the ballots, as you pointed out. Some of these ballots in some states can’t even be opened until election day. And if there’s thousands of ballots, it’s going to take time to do it. And by the way, our military… They’ve been voting by ballots since the end of the Civil War, in effect. And that’s what’s going to happen. Why is it, for them, somehow not fraudulent. It’s the same process. It’s honest. No one has established at all that there is fraud related to mail-in ballots, that somehow it’s a fraudulent process.

Donald Trump: (01:10:07)
It’s already been established. Take a look at Carolyn Maloney’s race-

Moderator: (01:10:10)
I asked you. You had an opportunity to respond [crosstalk 01:10:13]. Go ahead [crosstalk 01:10:14]. Vice President Biden, go ahead.

Joe Biden: (01:10:15)
He has no idea what he’s talking about. Here’s the deal. The fact is, I will accept it, and he will too. You know why? Because once the winner is declared after all the ballots are counted, all the votes are counted, that’ll be the end of it. That’ll be the end of it. And if it’s me, in fact, fine. If it’s not me, I’ll support the outcome. And I’ll be a president, not just for the Democrats. I’ll be a president for Democrats and Republicans. And this guy-

Donald Trump: (01:10:41)
I want to see an honest ballot cut-

Moderator: (01:10:43)
Gentlemen, just say that’s the end of it [crosstalk 01:10:45]. This is the end of this debate-

Donald Trump: (01:10:47)
I want to see an honest ballot count.

Moderator: (01:10:48)
We’re going to leave it there-

Donald Trump: (01:10:49)
And I think he does too-

Moderator: (01:10:50)
… to be continued in more debates as we go on. President Trump, Vice President Biden, it’s been an interesting hour and a half. I want to thank you both for participating in the first of three debates that you have agreed to engage in. We want to thank Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic for hosting this event. The next debate, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates, will be one week from tomorrow, October 7th, at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. The two vice presidential nominees, Vice President Mike Pence and Senator Kamala Harris will debate at 9:00 PM Eastern that night. We hope you watch. Until then, thank you, and good night. Thank you.
